Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                   monsters of
                 LEGEND
        Credits 	
                                                             II                                   Contents
        Original Authors                                               Introduction	                                  2
        August Hahn, Gareth Hanrahan & Lizard

        Developers                                                     Here be Monsters	                              9
        Darren Pearce


        Editor
        Matthew Sprange


        Layout
        Amy Perrett


        Interior Illustrations
        Jesus Barony, Eric Bergeron, Stacy Drum, David
        Esbri, Marcio Fiorito, Robert Graham, Martin
        Hanford, Danilo Moretti, Vitor Ishimura,
        Kythera, John McSweeny, Jon Netherland, Randy
        Nunley, Tony Parker, Sean Parnell, Gillian Pearce,
        Phil Renne, Chad Sergesketter, Stephen Shep-
        herd, Aaron Siddall, Jamie Sims, Christophe Swal,
        Simon Taylor, Amanda Webb

        Special Thanks
        Will Chapman




                                                Copyright Information
        Monsters of Legend II©2013 Mongoose Publishing. All rights reserved. Reproduction of non-Open Game Con-
        tent of this work by any means without the written permission of the publisher is expressly forbidden. Legend is
        presented under the Open Game Licence. See page 182 for the text of this licence. All text paragraphs and tables
         containing game mechanics and statistics derivative of Open Game Content and the System Reference Docu-
         ment are considered to be Open Game Content. All other significant characters, names, places, items, art and
                     text herein are copyrighted by Mongoose Publishing. All rights reserved. Printed in UK

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                    introduction
      There are many mundane and supernatural beasts in the world, and there are those which push
      the boundaries of power in many ways. Some of the beings inside this book are true Monsters
      of Legend, power-houses of brute strength, demonic masters who shake mountains with their
      footsteps. These are monsters which seasoned adventurers should fear, respect and challenge in
      epic confrontations.

      This book provides Game Masters with a resource for truly legendary and memorable encounters,
      from the powerful servitors of astral beings to the horned lackeys of the deepest and darkest
      Hells. There are new constructs, beasts and more within these pages. Some of these creatures
      could be adapted by Game Masters who want to use them as playable races in their campaign
      worlds. However, many are truly unique powers who have preyed on mortals for centuries.

      Monsters of Legend 2 only requires the Legend Core Rulebook. Arms of Legend and Monsters
      of Legend are optional but useful.


      Adventuring Creatures
      Rather like Monsters of Legend, every creature in this book has a set of statistics which
      represent an average member of that species. Game Masters are free to use these monsters as-is
      or generate their own using the rules in the Adventurer Creation chapter of the Legend Core
      Rulebook. Every creature has their pertinent statistics and information listed, including random
      characteristics and important traits, allowing Game Masters to create a character from any of the
      creatures presented. In addition, Game Masters can use the experience rules from the Improving
      Adventurers chapter in the Legend Core Rulebook to make even more powerful creatures for the
      players to confront in their quests. This works well when making a ‘leader’ or ‘commander’ type
      creature with minions at their beck and call such as powerful demons who often have legions of
      weaker ones at their command.


      Creatures and Intelligence
      Some of the creatures in this book have a randomly determined INT, such as powerful planar
      beings and so forth. Some of the creatures of a lower intelligence will have a static number –
      the difference between these two methods, 2D6+6 compared to five for example is to denote
      sapience. A creature with a randomly determined INT is intelligent and sapient, capable of
      rational thoughts and self-determination. A creature with a static number is sentient but not
      sapient.

      Fixed-INT creatures like lions and tigers have a set, non-random INT; they act on instinct,
      rather than logic or any kind of intuition. It does not mean that all Fixed-INT creatures are
      identically intelligent but it does denote that lions (INT 5) would be smarter than horses (INT
      4) and can be used as a quick baseline to determine the way a creature will act. Creatures with a
      very large Fixed-INT score have rudimentary reasoning abilities, as well as a set of complex and
      varied finely-honed instincts.

 2
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Undead and Charisma
        Some undead have a CHA score which reflects their connection to their former souls and not
        their physical appearance. For example, monsters like the wintersinger which perform a beautiful
        song.


        Traits
        Many creatures have abilities that are not covered by the standard character generation; these
        traits represent innate powers or special/supernatural abilities above and beyond their normal
        Characteristics, Abilities and Skills. The full description of these Traits and their effect on the
        game follows.


        Breathe Flame
        The creature can breathe flame as a Combat Action. The flame covers a cone in front of the
        creature, which stretches for its POW in metres. At its furthest extent, the cone is equal to ½ the
        creature’s POW in width.

        Any Adventurer caught in the flame suffers fire damage to all Hit Locations, though an
        Adventurer may dive for cover to halve this damage. Armour Points count as normal.

        A creature may only breathe this flame once in a specific time period, usually once per hour or
        once per day. Further attempts to breathe flame within this time period require the creature to
        make a Resilience test, with a cumulative -20% penalty for every attempt.


        Dark Sense
        The creature possesses a combination of Dark Sight, olfactory awareness and echolocation to
        achieve precise underground awareness and orientation. Creatures with this trait function as well
        underground as humans function above in broad daylight.


        Dark Sight
        This allows the creature to treat pitch black conditions as darkness.


        Diseased
        The creature carries a contagious disease, which is passed on to anyone who is wounded by its
        attacks, or remains in close proximity to its body without adequate sanitary precautions. The
        description will describe the particular contagion the creature employs.


        Earth Sense
        Some creatures are so in tune with the rock around them that they can work perfectly well in the
        total darkness of the deep. By sensing heat and air pressure, a creature with Earth Sense can fight
        and make Perception tests with no penalty so long as their target is no more than 10 meters away.


        Excellent Swimmer
        The creature gains a +30% bonus to its Athletics skill whenever swimming. In addition, the
        creature uses its normal movement score when swimming.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                              3
      Formidable Natural Weapons
      The creature’s natural weapons are as tough and durable as metal. As such they may parry weapon
      attacks with them. The SIZ of the weapon, for parrying purposes, is given in the description of
      the creature’s attacks.


      Life Sense
      In tune with the rhythms of nature, this creature can determine the vitality of any living creature by
      touch alone. If the creature touches another and makes a successful Perception test, it will learn of the
      target’s current Hit Points, Fatigue level and whether it is currently afflicted by any poisons or disease.


      Magic Sense
      This allows supernatural creatures, such as spirits, to perceive the magical aura of other creatures.
      A successful Perception test reveals the current Magic Points and any extant spells or magical
      effects upon another creature or object.


      Night Sight
      This allows the creature to treat partial darkness as illuminated and darkness as partial darkness.


      Poison
      One of the creature’s attacks, or possibly its very form, is poisoned. The description will describe
      the particular poison or venom the creature employs.


      Creature Descriptions
      Creatures are defined by several factors.

      Characteristics: Both random and average Characteristic scores are listed here. Use the average
      Characteristics for a typical member of the species; but for detailed creatures, randomly generated
      versions can be used.

      Some creatures may have no entry for CHA; this reflects animals, mostly, and indicates that
      CHA is not an important Characteristic for this kind of creature.

      Hit Locations: As well as the random scores for determining which Hit Location is struck in
      combat, there are two scores listed – the first is the natural Armour Points of the location (if any)
      and the second is its Hit Points.

      Attributes, Traits, Skills and Magic: Skills, Combat Actions, Strike Rank Modifier, Movement,
      Traits, Typical Armour and Special rules are noted beneath the Characteristic and Hit Location
      entries. The skills are the basic skills for the creature type – individual creatures may well possess
      enhanced scores or additional skills.

      All creatures have Persistence and Resistance scores. Generally Persistence is calculated as the
      creature’s POW multiplied by three with a +10% bonus added. Resilience is calculated using a
      similar method but uses CON. Some creatures may have higher or lower Persistence or Resilience
      values that these formulae generate, reflecting on their innate nature.

      Where a creature is capable of using magic, the magical type it is skilled in is quoted, along
      with the appropriate skill value, namely Common Magic %, Pact and Lore %, and, for Sorcery,
 4
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Sorcery (grimoire) and Manipulation %. The spells a creature knows are listed as well. For
        example for Sorcery the spells appear in a Grimoire entry.

        Where a creature is capable of flight such as a demon or a dragon or can swim, two movement
        rates are given, separated by a slash. The first is the creatures ground movement rate, the second
        is their flight or swim movement rate as appropriate.

        Weapons: The creature’s preferred available attacks and/or Combat Styles are listed. Combat
        Styles are named based on the creature’s type of attack, or its preferred weapon type. They are
        usually listed as Combat Style (list of weapons, attacks) % to give a Game Master a narrative and
        mechanical statistic for the monster.


        A Note on Good and Evil
        Good, Evil and so forth are all concepts which come from various games that use alignments.
        Since Legend does not use alignment, concepts such as Law and Chaos, Light and Dark govern
        the celestial powers that be. There are places in the cosmos where the concept of good and evil
        are given form and creatures such as anarchons are birthed by great upheaval, chaotic elements
        bound to them so strongly they take on the embodiment of these ideals. So in this book when
        something is described as a good or evil creature, this is not set in stone. When the Games
        Master chooses a creature that prefers to battle evil, they will battle evil even if it is perpetrated
        by someone who has good intentions.

        Good is not just the idea of a person or being who is flawless, a bright shining exemplar of their
        kind – it is a tag that mundane humans put onto a creature or being who falls outside their
        knowledge. Beings such as the anarchons or demons are vastly superior and completely alien to
        the mortal mind. They are not good or evil; they are working to their own plans and agendas
        based on criteria the human mind finds hard to understand. So in game terms Good and Evil
        are used to describe creatures and beings who have performed acts that are pigeon-holed by the
        mortal world into those concepts.

        Good can be just as bad as evil, flawless, bound by law and totalitarian in its goals. Evil can be
        considered brutal and tyrannical but with a huge seductive draw, power corrupts, absolute power
        corrupts absolutely. Evil can be considered to be inaction and selfishness as much as Good can
        be considered to be action in situations which do not really warrant interference. Thus in the
        text when the Games Master reads something as good or evil, the motivations for that creature
        are up to him to decide.


        The Planes
        Some of the creatures in this book have a connection to other planes of existence. The purpose
        of this section is to explain a simple planar design for the game which allows Games Masters to
        incorporate new ideas and these monsters into existing campaigns and provide a backbone from
        which to support the concepts of planar existence and planar travel in fantasy worlds.

        Planes of all Kinds: There are planes for everything in this design; think of them as the layers
        of skin of an onion. These layers provide shells of reality for all sorts of dimensions. The forces
        of decay and entropy whirl around and between them, linked by a thin veil between one and
        the other. In essence, sandwiched in each layer of the onion there is a barrier which prevents
        planar creatures from crossing over from one dimension to the other by accident. The Games
        Master can create planes and slot them into this design quickly and easily. Remember that in this
        cosmology there is a bright core at the centre of the onion where the One Being resides; a being
        with an alien and powerful mind, with its own agenda and goals.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                 5
      The One Being: Genderless, timeless and some say formless – the One Being is a concept more
      than a creature. Perhaps the thoughts and hopes, dreams and fears of a billion different worlds
      and dimensions across the multiverse came together and created this entity or perhaps something
      else transpired. The One Being provides the central burst of creation from which all other planes
      ripple out. However, the truth of the matter is that the One Being is only a tiny fragment of
      a thousand other energies which combine to form a whole, each a different face on a different
      world. This provides the multi-verse with a billion different religions and ideals. No wonder
      there are so many wars when no one can agree on just what is really in charge out there.

      Planar Travel: With the addition of planes of existence to the equation, there has to be some way
      to get from A to B. Travelling via magic is one of the many ways to cross the boundaries of the
      veil between these planes and planar travel spells are the best method. There are also some other
      methods which can add a twist of flavour to the planar concept.

      Planar Travel Armour: This ancient armour was crafted by powerful sorcerer-kings in a far off
      time and place. It appears to be made of ivory and gold, with a fully sealed helmet and several
      crystals embedded into the armour’s construction. When donned and activated it allows the
      wearer to traverse the planes of existence, navigating to the exact plane via a complex set of spell
      matrices built into the armour’s flawless gemstones. The wearer is protected from the planar
      environment while inside the armour.

      Planar Travel Gem: This flawless gemstone, either diamond or emerald, is linked to a specific
      plane. Once used it provides a one-way trip to that plane. Another gem linked to the departure
      plane is required to get back. It also requires a Persistence test to activate; failure means the gem
      lies dormant for a day before it can be used again. The gem provides no protection from planar
      energies.

      Planar Travel Cabinet: A powerful dimension travelling master of magic created this curious
      device. It appears to be a six foot tall by four foot box, made of dark wood and covered in
      alchemical and mystical symbols. The box can travel accurately from one plane to the next, not
      through time or space. It is completely sealed and the control systems inside are a curious mix
      of magic and gear-driven technology. It is also oddly bigger on the inside than the out. A spell
      protects the box and the travellers from the odd energies of the planes themselves.

      Planar Vessel: Supposedly made by a long-dead ancient race of planar explorers, these wondrous
      silver and ivory crafted ships can traverse the barriers between the planes. They are always
      exquisite in design and craftsmanship, usually with billowing astral sails and long elongated
      hulls. They are not equipped with any kind of weapons but are protected by magic so that the
      ship and crew are unharmed by planar energies.

      Planar Protection: Many of the planes are dangerous, not just because of the creatures that
      inhabit them. They have searing energies and odd effects that can make travel extremely perilous.
      There are planar protection spells and items to make sure that the errant explorer is not turned
      inside out by the Chaos Plane or blinded by the pure light of creation in the Plane of Light. They
      come in many shapes and sizes, from armour to weapons and small amulets or rings.

      Planar Cosmology: This is just an example of the kind of planar cosmology to support the
      concepts of good and evil found in many of the write-ups for creatures such as the Anachra.
      Planes are often known as ‘verses to seasoned astral explorers and their ilk.

      Centre Verse: This is the core of the planes, where all the skins are ripples of the One Being’s
      unfathomable agenda. The plane itself is a highly structured environment which appears to be

 6
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        a grand temple or library with thousands of rooms, hundreds of floors and extensive walkways
        which stretch to near-infinity.

        Law Verse: Here everything is done according to a great plan; there is no room for compromise
        and no room for discussion. The letter of the law is the letter of the law and woe betide anyone
        who crosses it. The plane appears as one connected series of barracks and regimented design,
        with smartly dressed soldiers and knights amongst the many inhabitants.

        Light Verse: The bright light of truth burns eternally here and unless the correct protection is
        used, the errant traveller can find themselves burned by it. Blindness is just one of the unpleasant
        effects should a traveller linger here without protective means. Many so-called good creatures
        are found on this plane and it is wise to remember that good is not always a ‘good’ thing, since
        many good creatures will attack beings whose ideals differ from their own due to an unwavering
        belief they are right.

        Dark Verse: The blackness of this plane can sap the will and soul of unprotected travellers; there
        are many so-called evil beings which dwell here since it is the furthest point away from the bright
        unwavering light of creation. Evil is subjective of course, and some of these creatures just have a
        different way of doing things.

        Mortal Verse: A billion different worlds spread across the multiverse, a thousand million lives all
        being lived without knowledge of each other. These planes represent many skins of that planar
        onion and from Earth to other dimensions; they are the only ones which require little or no
        protection to travel to.

        Chaos Verse: Not one but hundreds of self re-inventing chaotic planes, the Chaos Verse is an
        unstable miasma of possibilities and realities, all of them whirling and swirling through the
        cosmology never settling on one place, or one design. The beings here are totally random,
        completely chaotic and do everything they can to buck the plans of order/Law as they prefer
        to be without authority. Venturing here without the correct protections could have disastrous
        consequences depending on the plane at the time.

        Shadow Verse: Shadow cannot exist without light and on this plane this is the murky result of
        the interaction with the Light Verse. There are alien beings here with devious plans and plots,
        things that lurk at the edges of peripheral vision and servitors of ancient beings too terrible to
        name let alone speak of. It is a grey miasma of mist and nothing more, unless you dare to explore
        deeper, it is advised to carry the strongest mental protections when venturing into this verse.

        Oblivion Verse: When the laws of man and being break down, when Chaos is not enough and
        when the dark is but a dream – Oblivion sets in. A natural entropy plane which also provides
        a home for many of the demonic beings mankind speaks of in hushed tones. It is a dangerous
        plane full of powerful entities and sub-planes which descend into concepts such as madness,
        anger, hate, guilt and jealousy for example. The demons of these planes are often born of such
        concepts and because they are powered by the belief of many, they become incredibly strong and
        capable of breaching into the Mortal Verse. The Verse appears as a desolated landscape with the
        ruins of a thousand lost civilisations stretching across the skyline into the distance under a triad
        of red-eye like suns.

        These are just a small sample of the kinds of planes a traveller might encounter and many of the
        beasts following are may be tied to, or come from such planes. It is also worth noting that the
        planes presented are not the be-all and end-all of planar cosmology for Legend, just a toolkit for
        Games Masters to use in a pinch or customise as they see fit.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                               7
      here be monsters




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Alchemical Duplicate	
        Describe this creature as if it were the individual it is duplicated from.

        Alchemical duplicates are artificial beings created by magicians from vats of alchemical
        compounds and blood. Alchemical duplicates are unnaturally tough and quite strong, but
        they are also rather stolid and dull, incapable of much imagination or deviation from their
        programmed instructions.

        To create a duplicate, the creator needs a drop of blood from another creature, termed the
        original. It does not gain any special abilities possessed by the original– it can only gain learned
        traits. The process by which these creatures are made is imperfect; thusly they gain the skills of
        the original but at a reduced score, usually at -20% to account for their imperfect creation.

        Duplicates are used for all sorts of purposes. Some are used in diabolical political ploys, replacing
        a king with a copy controlled by its creator. Others are used as shields against assassination, or as
        a means of recovering lost information.



        Combat Notes
        An alchemical duplicate uses the skills and combat styles it learned from the original. They are
        best suited to battling against their original form and know all their tricks and techniques. When
        fighting their original, an alchemical duplicate gains a +30% to related combat skills and styles.

        When it is killed it dissolves into a pool of alchemical slime which slowly gurgles away.

        Alchemical Duplicates possess only fragmented memories of their original, so they must make
        appropriate tests at -40% unless they first manage to make a successful Routine INT test. If they
        succeed then all is well and good, they can use the skill as it should be. If they fail then there is a
        5% chance this stresses the duplicate out enough to drive it insane.

        Repeated questioning increases the Difficulty of the test by one step; a Routine test becomes
        Hard and so on. If given enough time to rest, for perhaps a day, the Difficulty drops by one
        step until it returns to Routine. This represents the duplicate’s mind healing. The alchemical
        duplicate here is based on a human frame, but there are other types which can be created with
        this process.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                  9
                  Dice            Average          1D20       Hit Location       AP/HP
       STR        3D6             14               1-3        Right Leg            -/6
       CON        3D6             15               4-6        Left Leg             -/6
       SIZ        3D6             15               7-9        Abdomen              -/7
       INT        3D6             9                10-12      Chest                -/8
       POW        3D6             9                13-15      Right Arm            -/5
       DEX        3D6             13               16-18      Left Arm             -/5
       CHA        3D6             10               19-20      Head                 -/6




       Combat Actions             2                Armour: May wear any armour of the original.
       Damage Modifier            +1D2
       Magic Points               9                Traits: None.
       Movement                   8m
       Strike Rank                +11              Skills: Any possessed by the original.



      Combat Styles
      Any from the Original (attack 1, attack 2) 88%

      Weapons
      Any weapon the original creature uses




 10
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Amber Animal	
      You see an amber beast, resembling a large rat with glowing white eyes.


      Amber animals are the creation of ancient rituals and powerful nature priests. The construction
      process is long and involved; it uses the spirit of a living animal infused with that of an intelligent
      living plant creature. Once the creature and spirit are combined the resulting construct can be
      gifted to an ally or used to serve the creator as an assassin, guardian or more.

      An amber animal appears to resemble the base creature, except it is carved of beautiful translucent
      amber. When damaged, it begins to crack and chip, finally shattering into amber dust when
      destroyed. Whilst this dust has no commercial value, it can be used by wizards and alchemists.

      Combat Notes
      The base creature keeps any Traits it may have had and any special attacks or qualities. It gains
      Dark Sight and a special immunity to electrical/lightning damage or effects. No spell or natural
      effect which causes lightning or electrical damage can harm an amber animal.

      Absorbing Touch: When fighting an amber animal the aggressor must watch for the creature’s
      ability to convert its body (using a Combat Action) into a liquid form. Smaller creatures than the
      amber animal are particularly vulnerable to this trick. A smaller creature can be swallowed whole
      and suffer the effects of Suffocation from the Legend Core Rulebook (page 76). A trapped arm
      or limb can be freed with a successful Hard Brawn test. If the amber animal is killed all trapped
      limbs or creatures are freed. Depending on the size of the creature, an amber animal can hold up
      to four others in its liquid form and may eject them at any time without sacrificing a Combat
      Action.

      Shock and Awe: An amber animal can generate an electrical charge through its claws or bite,
      transferring the damage to its enemies. Foes take 1D6 electrical damage additional to any the
      creature may cause normally.

      Armoured Shell: The amber animal has a base three points of armour if it has none, or adds two
      to any armour already factored in.




 12
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Amber Crocodile	

                      Dice       Average           1D20        Hit Location          AP/HP
         STR          4D6+12     26                1-3         Tail                   7/8
         CON          3D6+8      19                4           Right Hind Leg         7/6
         SIZ          4D6+12     26                5           Left Hind Leg          7/6
         INT          3          3                 6-9         Hindquarters           7/9
         POW          3D6        11                10-14       Forequarters           7/10
         DEX          2D6        7                 15          Right Front Leg        7/6
                                                   16          Left Front Leg         7/6
                                                   17-20       Head/Neck              7/8



         Combat Actions          2                 Armour: Scales and Amber shell.
         Damage Modifier         +1D12
         Magic Points            11                Traits: Dark Sight. Special Immunity.
         Movement                6m/10m
                                 (swim)
         Strike Rank             +7                Common Skills: Athletics 80%, Brawn 75%,
                                                   Perception 55%, Persistence 54%, Resilience
                                                   70%, Stealth 67%, Swim 98%
                                                   Advanced Skills: Track 88%



        Combat Styles
        Crocodile Tears (Bite, Tail Bash) 79%

        Weapons
        Type 		                Range	    Size	   Reach	    Damage			                  AP/HP
        Bite		                 --	       M	      M	        1D8+1D12+1D6 (electrical)	 As for Head
        Tail Bash		            --	       L	      L	        1D6+1D12+1D6 (electrical)	 As for Arm




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                    13
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Anachra
        These creatures come from another plane; they are the guardians and servitors of greater powers
        beyond the ken of mortals. They have several features in common and are broken into different
        sub-types, for ease of play and creation only the most important of these mysterious beings are
        detailed here, the Games Master can create many more.

        All anachra use the following special rules, unless otherwise noted in their entry.

        Aura of Glory: When an anachra begins to go into battle it becomes angry. Any allied beings
        within a 15 metre radius of an anachra are bathed in their aura, a bright sphere of light which
        begins to shine from within the creature and covers the area. Allied creatures and the anachra
        inside the aura’s area of effect gain a +10% bonus to all resistance checks and attacks made whilst
        inside the effect, as well as being able to move at their movement rate +2 metres. Enemies are
        demoralised and their skills and attacks are penalised by -10%.

        Mystic Circle against Evil: A circle of power always surrounds the creature; it blocks offensive
        magic like the Absorption spell in the Legend Core Rulebook (page 177).

        Teleportation: The creature teleports itself as per the Teleport spell in the Legend Core Rulebook
        (page 208). It can carry only what it has on its person; no additional objects can be teleported.

        Superlative Language: The creature can speak and understand any creature that has a language,
        and are able to converse in multiple languages. This ability is always active.

        Humanoid form: With no cost in Magic Points or need to cast a spell, anachra can transform
        themselves into humanoids to disguise themselves on other planes, especially the mortal ones.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                              15
      Cat Anarchon	
      The figure is that of a humanoid cat, albeit one over three metres in height. Despite its size, it moves
      with tremendous grace and speed. It wields a large, three-flanged whip, and seems poised to pounce
      at any moment, though its body language gives no clue as to direction or target. Its garb is a simple
      tunic of elegant make, cut tight to the body so as not to interfere with movement.

      Cat anarchons are agile, athletic, celestial beings who spend a great deal of time exploring, either
      on other planes, or on the various material worlds. They are intensely curious and activist beings,
      not willing to wait to be summoned to battle evil. When summoned, they are generally wilful,
      even while obeying the terms of the summoner (if such obedience is part of the spell). They tend
      to have a free-wheeling interpretation of orders, generally clinging to the overall spirit but not
      necessarily the letter.

      When in the Mortal Verse, they will usually adopt the guise of a human or cat form, though they
      may take other forms if it suits them to do so. Their agility and athleticism makes them excellent
      urban scouts and spies, and they often serve the cause of good by gathering information rather
      than by direct conflict.

      They wield a special whip which has a spell-like ability, it confuses enemies as per the Legend Core
      Rulebook’s entry on poisons and diseases.



      Combat Notes
      Cat anarchons enjoy a fight – but only if they are winning. They will flee as soon as it is obvious
      they are being overpowered, unless the cause is especially vital. They will never abandon
      innocents to evil or fail to hold some vital point to the end, but they will also not die for the
      sake of appearing brave or honourable. In combat, they use their agility, especially their teleport
      ability and acrobatics skill to keep away from powerful melee opponents, using their extremely
      long reach with the whip to deal damage without being touched. When most of their foes are
      confused, the cat anarchon will pick them off one by one at its leisure.

      Agility: Cat anarchons are nimble and quick, they gain a bonus of +20% to their Athletics and
      Acrobatics skills.

      Deafening Yowl: Once per day a cat anarchon can let loose with a deafening roar, this yowling
      noise terrifies lesser beasts and any creature within a 40 metre radius must make a Hard
      Persistence test or be so frightened of the creature they move their maximum movement away
      from it for 2D4 rounds. The affected creatures are also deafened for 3D6 rounds.

      Confusing Whip: A target struck in melee by the weapon must make a Difficult Resilience test
      or be Confused as per the Legend Core Rulebook (page 79) for 2D6 rounds.




 16
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                  Dice        Average           1D20          Hit Location         AP/HP
         STR      2D6+11      18                1-3           Right Leg                3/7
         CON      2D6+9       16                4-6           Left Leg                 3/7
         SIZ      2D6+10      17                7-9           Abdomen                  3/8
         INT      2D6+5       12                10-12         Chest                    3/9
         POW      2D6+11      18                13-15         Right Arm                3/6
         DEX      4D6+7       21                16-18         Left Arm                 3/6
         CHA      3D6+9       20                 19-20        Head                     3/7




         Combat Actions       3                  Armour: Celestial cloth. No Armour Penalty.
         Damage Modifier      +1D4
         Magic Points         18                 Traits: Dark Sight, Anarchon Traits
         Movement             8m
         Strike Rank          +17                Common Skills: Athletics 79%, Brawn 76%,
                                                 Evade 82%, Insight 73%, Lore (Celestial
                                                 Beings) 97%, Perception 80%, Persistence
                                                 80%, Resilience 80%, Stealth 89%, Unarmed
                                                 75%,
                                                 Advanced Skills: Acrobatics 80%, Language
                                                 (All) 90%, Lore (Celestial Magic), Pact
                                                 (Celestial Powers) 89%, Track 88%
                                                 Spells: Blessing, Cure Disease/Poison, Dismiss
                                                 Magic, Exorcism, Heal Body, Heal Mind, Heal
                                                 Wound, Illusion



        Combat Styles
        Feline Grace (1-H Sword, 2-H Sword, Whip, Bite, Claw) 101%


        Weapons
        Type 		            Range	    Size	   Reach	      Damage			                  AP/HP
        Bite		             --	       M	      T	          1D8+1D4	             	     As for Head
        Claw		             --	       M	      M	          1D6+1D4	             	     As for Arm
        Whip		             --	       M	      VL	         1D4+1D4 Entangle, Special 3/8




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                  17
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Chain Anachra	
        Lowering one massive metal-shod foot is a huge man dressed in chains that wrap around his torso
        and move as if alive. Like a writhing serpent, a spiked chain of black metal coils over his arms and
        in his grasp.


        Chain anachra are cut from the same cloth as hammer anarchons and often fight side by side
        with them in the midst of titanic battles. The key difference between the two is the weapon they
        wield, as it shows an important difference in their psyches. Hammer anachra live for battle for
        its own sake, while chain anachra have dedicated themselves to a singular cause – freedom. They
        cannot tolerate bondage of any form, having built their formidable suits of armour and great
        weapons from the chains of those they have freed in the past.

        Chain anachra are rarely summoned, but they sometimes come to the aid of anyone falsely
        imprisoned by those who would hide their base actions under the mantle of righteousness or the
        pursuit of the law. They think nothing of slaying guards or legal authorities in their quest for
        freedom; in their eyes, those participating in wrongful capture are as bad as the tyrants ordering
        such things in the first place.

        Combat Notes
        Mercy is not a word the chain anachra understand in any form. Chaotic, like all their brethren,
        they rarely stick around to help prisoners once immediate bondage has been dealt with. To the
        chain anachra, it is the act of being caged that is offensive. Once the cell has been sundered or
        the manacles shattered, those once bound are free. Whether the unfortunates can retain their
        freedom afterward, especially as they may still be in the heart of their prisons, is a complication
        few chain anachra ever consider.

        Chain of Chaos: The mainstay weapon of the chain anachra is a huge chain, a massive metal
        linkage which can be used to shatter all implements of bondage, break bones and smash skulls.
        It can be thrown and returns to the throwers hand instantly, it can be hurled every round as a
        Combat Action. When the chain anachra is slain the chain becomes a normal chain and loses all
        powers. If the chain is separated from the anachra he can call it back using a Combat Action so
        long as it is on the same plane. The magic of the chain grants a +10% bonus in combat.

        Shatter Bonds: By using a Combat Action the chain anachra can surround himself with its
        metal chain, wrapping it around his limbs. Any time after he can smash his fists into the ground,
        calling upon his true power. A wave of magical red tinted energy washes outwards to a distance
        of 20 metres. Upon contact with the wave, all locks, manacles, hindrance magic and any
        effect capable of restricting movement or imprisoning a being is opened, sundered or instantly
        dispelled; only natural terrain remains unaffected. Magical prisons are also opened, and this
        includes things like genie lamps and so forth. It cannot destroy or damage such things though,
        only free the trapped being inside.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                               19
                  Dice            Average              1D20        Hit Location      AP/HP
       STR        3D6+11          22                   1-3         Right Leg           5/8
       CON        3D6+7           18                   4-6         Left Leg            5/8
       SIZ        2D6+13          20                   7-9         Abdomen             5/9
       INT        2D6+3           10                   10-12       Chest               5/10
       POW        2D6+9           16                   13-15       Right Arm           5/7
       DEX        3D6+7           18                   16-18       Left Arm            5/7
       CHA      2D6+7             14                   19-20       Head                5/8




       Combat Actions             3                    Armour: Supernatural chain. No Armour
                                                       Penalty.
       Damage Modifier            +1D8
       Magic Points               16                   Traits: Anarchon Traits
       Movement                   8m
       Strike Rank                +14                  Common Skills: Brawn 80%, Evade 89%,
                                                       Insight 80%, Lore (Celestial Beings) 80%,
                                                       Perception 90%, Persistence 88%, Resilience
                                                       89%, Unarmed 88%
                                                       Advanced Skills: Language (All) 87%, Lore
                                                       (Celestial Magic) 80%, Pact (Celestial
                                                       Powers) 89%
                                                       Magic: Channel Strength, Disarm, Fear,
                                                       Sever Spirit, Shield, Spirit Block, True
                                                       (Chain)



      Combat Styles
      Chain of Chaos (Chain) 112%

      Weapons
      Type 	          Range	 Size	     Reach	   Damage	                                      AP/HP
      Chain	          --	    M	        M	       1D6+1+1D8 Entangle, Stun Location	           8/12




 20
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Hammer Anarchon	
      The figure is that of a man, over three metres in height, built broad and solid. He wears a loose
      white tunic fastened with large clasps of black iron and a band of the same material encircles his
      head. Held in one hand is a massive, two-headed hammer, and he moves it as if it were a part of his
      own flesh.


      Hammer anarchons are boisterous celestial beings who seem to enjoy battling evil as much for
      the battle itself as for nobler reasons, something which causes tension with other forces for good
      on other planes. They gleefully hurl themselves into conflict on any plane, often venturing into
      darker realms for no reason other than to smash evil. If summoned for purposes other than
      conflict, they are not good at hiding their disappointment. In addition, they have a slightly
      hedonistic bent, and enjoy good food, drink and music much more than many of their staid
      counterparts. A hammer anarchon on a mission in the Mortal Verse, in humanoid guise, may be
      side-tracked by a welcoming inn or town fair.

      Hammer anarchons are often summoned for missions dealing with large numbers of smaller foes.
      A group of heroes may ask a hammer anarchon to clear a path for them through an encamped
      army or aid them in breaking out of a besieged fortress.

      Combat Notes
      Hammer anarchons rarely have much in the way of complex tactics. They are skilled at sizing
      up foes and knowing who to hit first, but such decisions are about the extent of their tactical
      thinking. They will use ranged attacks against foes they cannot easily hit, such as distant mages
      or flyers, but prefer to get up close and personal. They use their hammer’s Quake ability as often
      as they can, sending nearby foes tumbling, and then following up with lethal blows against the
      prone opponents. If badly wounded, they indulge in tactical retreat, but doing so galls them,
      and they will always return later. Against non-evil and weaker foes, they will temper their blows
      (taking a -10% penalty and trying to stun them) but against evil, they show no mercy.

      Hammer Time: Hammer anarchons use a massive hammer. This huge metal weapon is made
      from black steel, wrapped in dark leather, roiling with chaotic and dangerous energies. It can be
      thrown with a Combat Action and returns to the thrower’s hand whether it hits or misses. The
      favourite use for this weapon is to unleash the power inside; using a Combat Action it produces
      a devastating quake, as described below. If the hammer anarchon is slain, its hammer becomes a
      mundane Great Hammer. If the hammer and anarchon are separated, he can call it back to his
      hand using a Combat Action, so long as it remains on the same plane.

      Quake: Every POW/4 (rounded down) rounds, the hammer anarchon can channel the energy
      inside his hammer by smashing it into the ground. This unleashes a short-ranged, but very
      powerful, shockwave out to 30 metres. The wave vibrations last until the hammer anarchon’s
      next round Combat Action and all characters within this area of effect must make Difficult
      Athletics tests or fall over, becoming disorientated and struggling to stand. Any objects and
      structures in the area take 5D6 points of damage.




 22
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                    Dice          Average            1D20        Hit Location          AP/HP
         STR        2D6+15        22                 1-3         Right Leg               6/8
         CON        2D6+11        18                 4-6         Left Leg                6/8
         SIZ        2D6+13        20                 7-9         Abdomen                 6/9
         INT        2D6+3         10                 10-12       Chest                   6/10
         POW        3D6+5         16                 13-15       Right Arm               6/7
         DEX        3D6+6         17                 16-18       Left Arm                6/7
         CHA        3D6+3         14                 19-20       Head                    6/8




         Combat Actions           3                  Armour: Celestial cloth. No Armour Penalty.
         Damage Modifier          +1D8
         Magic Points             16                 Traits: Anarchon Traits.
         Movement                 8m
         Strike Rank              +17                Common Skills: Brawn 90%, Evade 84%,
                                                     Insight 50%, Lore (Celestial Beings) 83%,
                                                     Perception 80%, Persistence 92%, Resilience
                                                     96%, Unarmed 87%
                                                     Advanced Skills: Language (All) 89%, Lore
                                                     (Celestial Magic) 86%, Pact (Celestial Powers)
                                                     84%
                                                     Magic: Berserk, Channel Strength, Crash of
                                                     Thunder, Disarm, Fear, True (Great Hammer)


        Combat Styles
        Quake Hammer (Great Hammer) 124%

        Weapons
        Type 	              Range	 Size	    Reach	   Damage	                                   AP/HP
        Great Hammer	       --	    H	       L	       1D10+3+1D8 Stun Location, Sunder	          4/10




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                       23
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Herald Anarchon	
        In a flash of light, a figure of unearthly beauty and grace appears. It resembles a human woman of
        great size, clad in a flowing gown of white radiance and bearing a quarterstaff of carved jade and
        pale silver. Only when she turns her face to you is her unearthly nature revealed. She has no facial
        features - no features at all.


        Even the courts of Chaos have some use for diplomacy and the trappings of an ordered throne.
        Herald anachra fill this niche by providing the services of a messenger, spy, infiltrator and
        information broker to any and all that require her. Known to be mercurial in her loyalties but
        never willing to betray an employer while she fulfils a given contract, a herald archon is a boon to
        any power able to secure her services and a thorn in the side of those she is sent against.

        Few herald anachra are seen for more than a few moments in their natural, faceless forms. They
        can generate the illusion of any appearance they wish, and alter their size and shape considerably
        through the use of their innate magical powers. Unfortunately for the heralds of chaos, their
        adherence to a strict code of conditional loyalty has brought with it one taint of Law; they can
        never actually possess a true face. They can conceal themselves with illusions and see using
        mystical blind vision, but will never know for themselves the joy of smelling a rose or seeing a
        rainbow after a storm.

        Unless circumstances dictate otherwise, herald anachra refuse to engage in any form of combat.
        When they must fight, they wield a large quarterstaff which has a stunning effect. This loses all
        magical properties upon the creature’s death.

        Combat Notes
        Herald anachra avoid killing at all costs, so much so that many powers believe them incapable of
        taking sentient life. This is untrue, but the act of doing so is abhorrent to them and they would
        rather risk grave punishment or even their own deaths. When they cannot avoid battle, they seek
        to end hostilities before they start with calm emotions. When this does not work, they employ
        their quarterstaffs to great effect. Herald anachra always retreat from a battle after stunning
        their foes and never attack when they are down. Not even direct orders can make them attack a
        helpless foe.

        Shout: Once per day, a herald anachra can roar in a deafening manner. All enemies within 50
        metres of her must make a Difficult Resilience test or be deafened for POW/4 (round down)
        rounds; all enemies within the area must also make a Hard Persistence test or panic and flee the
        herald anachra’s presence for POW/4 (round down) rounds.

        Sunstaff: Herald anachra carry a special staff that only functions in the way described while
        in their hands. A blow from the staff forces the being struck to make an immediate Difficult
        Resilience test or be stunned for a round. These stun effects are not cumulative; a creature can
        only be stunned once at a time. If the anarchon is slain, the staff returns to being a normal stave
        with no magical powers.

        Immunity to Aural and Visual Attacks: The herald anachra are faceless and featureless, they
        cannot suffer the effects of any natural or magical based attacks which are designed to blind or
        disorientate. Any effect they must hear or see fails on them immediately. This does not include
        any kind of vibration effect, or sonic-based damage – these work as normal.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                               25
                  Dice         Average            1D20        Hit Location         AP/HP
       STR        2D6+11       18                 1-3         Right Leg              37
       CON        2D6+9        16                 4-6         Left Leg               3/7
       SIZ        2D6+10       17                 7-9         Abdomen                3/8
       INT        2D6+5        12                 10-12       Chest                  3/9
       POW        2D6+11       18                 13-15       Right Arm              3/6
       DEX        2D6+14       21                 16-18       Left Arm               3/6
       CHA        2D6+13       20                 19-20       Head                   3/7




       Combat Actions          3                  Armour: Celestial cloth. No Armour Penalty.
       Damage Modifier         +1D4
       Magic Points            18                 Traits: Anarchon Traits
       Movement                8m
       Strike Rank             +17                Common Skills: Brawn 70%, Evade 92%,
                                                  Insight 88%, Lore (Celestial Beings) 89%,
                                                  Perception 80%, Persistence 87%, Resilience
                                                  80%, Unarmed 87%
                                                  Advanced Skills: Language (All) 95%, Lore
                                                  (Celestial Magic) 90%, Pact (Celestial Powers)
                                                  90%
                                                  Magic:     Blessing,   Channel       Strength,
                                                  Consecrate, Cure Disease/Poison, Exorcism,
                                                  Heal Body, Heal Mind, Heal Wound, Illusion


      Combat Styles
      Herald’s Defence (Quarterstaff ) 115%

      Weapons
      Type 	                Range	    Size	   Reach	      Damage	                      AP/HP
      Jade Quarterstaff 	   --	       M	      L	          1D8+1D4Stun Location	        6/10




 26
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Storm Anachron	
      It is a gigantic man, over four metres tall, formed of solid storm cloud. He is not misty or indistinct;
      it is as if a storm were shaped into the body of a perfect man and then encased in unbreakable glass.
      Clouds and bolts of lightning roil and flash throughout his form, but he gives the impression of
      nothing less than absolute solidity and resolute strength. From time to time, his body is wrapped in
      crackling streams of electrical force.


      Storm anarchons are the personification of righteous fury. They despise evil, especially that which
      is shaped by tyranny and discipline. Unlike the playful cat anarchons or the boisterous hammer
      anarchons, the storm anarchons allow nothing to distract themselves from their mission. As
      befits their chaotic nature, they often act on impulse, launching sudden strikes on evil demons
      and devil creatures on other planes or tyrants and warlords in the Mortal Verse. They are ever-
      restless, knowing there is no end to the enemy they exist to destroy.

      Impatience is one of their defining traits, and is a reason they do less good, overall, than their
      power might otherwise indicate. They rush to battle without preparation, often without fully
      sizing up the scale of the threat. When summoned, they will usually attempt to incite imminent
      action, even if simply called upon for advice or to lend support to a carefully planned operation.

      Combat Notes
      Just because the storm anarchon is eager to go to action does not mean they are poor fighters once
      battle is joined. They use their wide range of abilities to lay waste to foes from a distance, and
      rely on their electrical aura and lightning blades to dispatch melee opponents. When working
      to protect the weak, they will lay down a cover of fog and then hold the line while their charges
      escape. They are aggressive but not suicidally stupid, and are capable of falling back when badly
      outmatched, though they are prone to misjudging just how badly off they really are.

      They normally wield their lightning sword in combat. This is a huge two-handed great sword
      which crackles with bright bolts of power. The sword functions as a normal great sword if the
      anarchon is slain. Otherwise it has the following benefits; it confers a +10% combat skill bonus
      against evil creatures, and adds +1D6 lightning damage to the anarchon’s attacks.

      Lightning Aura: Three times in a day, a storm anarchon can surround himself with a crackling
      field of electrical energy. Any opponent striking the anarchon must make a Difficult Resilience
      test or take 4D6 points of damage to the weapon arm. If the test succeeds, the damage is halved.
      The storm anarchon can maintain this field for ten combat rounds at a time.

      Lightning Blast: Once per day, a storm anarchon can unleash a 25 metre radius of pure electrical
      energy. All creatures in this zone are struck by tendrils of lightning and must make an immediate
      Routine Evade test. Failure results in 2D6 lightning damage per location and success limits this
      to 1D6. Metal armoured enemies take an additional 1D4 points of damage as tendrils of magical
      lightning seek them out.

      Storm Fury: The storm anarchon, when confronted with a truly evil being or enemy, enters a
      violent and chaotic rage until that creature is slain or driven off. He gains a bonus of +10% to his
      weapon skill attacks, but loses 20% from Evade tests due to the reckless abandon of his combat.
      The storm anarchon will only attack the target of this fury and no other. It cannot be triggered at
      will and only the sight of the truly evil being will bring this rage upon him. The storm anarchon’s
      fury can only be triggered three times a day.


 28
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                  Dice        Average          1D20        Hit Location        AP/HP
       STR        3D6+15      26               1-3         Right Leg             4/8
       CON        2D6+9       16               4-6         Left Leg              4/8
       SIZ        2D6+14      21               7-9         Abdomen               4/9
       INT        2D6+9       16               10-12       Chest                 4/10
       POW        2D6+11      18               13-15       Right Arm             4/7
       DEX        2D6+11      18               16-18       Left Arm              4/7
       CHA      2D6+7         14               19-20       Head                  4/8




       Combat Actions         3                Armour: Static Armour (chain equivalent). No
                                               Armour Penalty.
       Damage Modifier        +1D10
       Magic Points           18               Traits: Anarchon Traits
       Movement               8m
       Strike Rank            +17              Common Skills: Brawn 90%, Evade 95%,
                                               Insight 80%, Lore (Celestial Beings) 89%,
                                               Perception 90%, Persistence 93%, Resilience
                                               90%, Unarmed 82%
                                               Advanced Skills: Language (All) 90%, Lore
                                               (Celestial Magic) 89%, Pact (Celestial Powers)
                                               92%
                                               Magic: Crash of Thunder, Dismiss Magic, Ebb
                                               and Flow, Elemental Summoning (Lightning),
                                               Fog, Heal Body, Heal Mind, Heal Wound,
                                               Lightning Strike, Mindblast, Rain


      Combat Styles
      Storm Warning (Great Sword) 115%

      Weapons
      Type 	               Range	 Size	 Reach	 Damage	                            AP/HP
      Lightning Sword	     --	    H	    L	     2D8+1D10+1D6 Bleed, Impale, Sunder	 8/15




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                29
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Barrow Troll	
        This creature has dark-blue skin, covered with patches of what look like fungus or dead flesh. Wispy
        strands of white hair sprout from its head and pale yellow eyes peer hungrily at you.


        Barrow trolls are a bigger and somewhat nastier strain of troll. They dwell in icy caves and glacial
        rifts, but prefer to live in tombs. They are carrion eaters; when a barrow troll kills, it does not
        eat its victim immediately. Instead, it buries the carcass in a cave or cairn, or freezes it in ice. A
        body can rot for decades before the barrow troll returns to feed. This taste for carrion gives the
        trolls their connection to the undead; while they are not undead themselves, they are certainty
        kin to ghouls and other creatures of that ilk. Their ropy bodies exude an eerie soul-sapping aura.
        Barrow trolls are often encountered in the company of undead and the dead hold no fear for
        them.

        They are cannier and more patient than other trolls, preferring to stalk their opponents instead
        of charging into a fight. They share the same vulnerability to sunlight as their other trollish
        cousins, so they prefer to hunt and at night. Any barrow troll caught in direct sunlight will suffer
        1D3 points of damage to all Hit Locations every hour of exposure. This damage takes the form
        of petrifaction and the injured location becomes stone.

        Combat Notes
        Barrow trolls rely on stealth to hunt and stalk their prey. They will also often make their lairs
        near undead so they can use them as cannon fodder or distractions as they move from shadow to
        shadow. They are damaged normally by fire, like their trollish counterparts.

        Devour: During a battle the troll can devour a corpse part or chunk of flesh to regenerate a
        location. The affected location heals 1D6 Hit Points. The troll can do this for POW/4 (rounded
        up) times per day.

        Rend: If both claw attacks manage to hit, the troll can add +1D8 points of damage to both
        attacks.

        Aura of Undeath: There is a strange aura of negative energy which whirls around Barrow Trolls.
        For 10 metres all spells around the barrow troll which relies on curative or divine properties,
        simply fail unless the caster manages to succeed in a Difficult Persistence test. Those who stand
        too close to the barrow troll (melee will count) run the risk of being drained by the dark energies
        which radiate from the body. They must make a Hard Resilience test or take 1D3 Hit Points of
        damage to all locations, per round.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                 31
                  Dice         Average             1D20        Hit Location       AP/HP
       STR        4D6+13       27                  1-3         Right Leg           3/11
       CON        4D6+11       25                  4-6         Left Leg            3/11
       SIZ        4D6+12       26                  7-9         Abdomen             3/12
       INT        3D6-1        10                  10-12       Chest               3/13
       POW        3D6-2        6                   13-15       Right Arm           3/10
       DEX        2D6-1        11                  16-18       Left Arm            3/10
       CHA        1D6          3                   19-20       Head                3/11




       Combat Actions          2                   Armour: Tough hide. No Armour Penalty.
       Damage Modifier         +1D12
       Magic Points            6                   Traits: Night Sight
       Movement                8m


       Strike Rank             +11                 Common Skills: Athletics 70%, Brawn 88%,
                                                   Evade 37%, Perception 45%, Persistence 24%,
                                                   Resilience 115%, Stealth 63%, Unarmed 72%
                                                   Advanced Skills: Track 79%

      Combat Styles
      Barrow Death (Claws, Unarmed) 98%

      Weapons
      Type 	          Range	      Size	   Reach	             Damage	               AP/HP
      Claws	          --	         M	      M	                 1D6+1D12	             As for Arm




 32
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Black Shuck	
      This is a big black dog, as dark as midnight. Its eyes gleam with an unnatural green light.


      Black shucks are normally dismissed as folklore or peasant tales, but these eerie creatures have
      been encountered by adventurers in the oddest of places. Physically, they appear to be ordinary
      dogs such as pitbulls or wolfhounds, but their eyes glow slightly green in the darkness. Black
      shucks are associated with treasure troves, haunted sights, dungeons and ruins and druidic groves,
      leading some to believe that they are wardens of such dangerous places. They have been known
      to hunt down and kill travellers, but locals tend to think ill of anyone killed by a black shuck.
      The general sentiment is that the fearsome hounds are beneficent in some way and anyone killed
      by one probably had it coming.

      Attempts to capture black shucks are fruitless, thanks to their ability to pass through shadows.
      They may sometimes accompany a rural adventurer for a time, but are not true companions and
      only work towards their own cryptic ends. There are many other stories and tales that surround
      these enigmatic beasts and a few tell of hounds leading children to safety, or particularly wicked
      children to their doom.

      Combat Notes
      A black shuck prefers to fight single opponents one at a time, using its Pass Through Shadows
      ability to move between them. If it is given half a chance it will kill one opponent before moving
      onto the next. Overwhelming numbers may force a black shuck to flee; in this case it will enter
      the shadows and vanish from sight.

      Pass Through Shadows: The black shuck can meld into one shadow and enter it to appear
      from another shadow elsewhere. The beast must have line of sight from entry to destination,
      otherwise it can only enter the shadow to escape from battle. It can only perform this shadowy
      walk POW/4 (rounded up) times per day.

      Dark Breath: The black shuck can emit a black vaporous mist once per combat round, obscuring
      the sight of creatures caught in the 10 metre cloud. They suffer the effects of blindness for the
      creature’s POW/4 (rounded up) combat rounds.




 34
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                    Dice          Average           1D20       Hit Location          AP/HP
         STR        3D6+5         16                1-2        Right Hind Leg          2/6
         CON        3D6+4         15                3-4        Left Hind Leg           2/6
         SIZ        3D6+4         15                5-7        Hindquarters            2/7
         INT        8             8                 8-10       Forequarters            2/8
         POW        3D6+2         13                11-13      Right Front Leg         2/5
         DEX        3D6+1         12                14-16      Left Front Leg          2/5
                                                    17-20      Head                    2/6




         Combat Actions           2                 Armour: None
         Damage Modifier          +1D4
         Magic Points             13                Traits: Night Sight
         Movement                 11m
         Strike Rank              +10               Common Skills: Athletics 77%, Evade 54%,
                                                    Perception 50%, Persistence 46%, Resilience
                                                    65%, Stealth 57%
                                                    Advanced Skills: Survival 75%, Track 70%

        Combat Styles
        Jaws of Shadow (Bite) 70%

        Weapons
        Type 	   Range	 Size	         Reach	   Damage	                        AP/HP
        Bite	    --	    M	            T	       1D8+1D4 Bleed, Trip	           As for Head




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                  35
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Bladeleaf	
        This small humanoid, barely a metre high, has bark-brown skin covering muscles which are
        stretched long and thin. Despite his small size, he seems elongated, as if a being half his height was
        pulled out like taffy. His hair resembles pine needles turned dry and yellow in the summer’s heat,
        and he has wings like large maple leaves, similarly dry and fragile in appearance. A curved and
        twisted smile contorts his features as a breeze comes from nowhere and begins to suck up forest debris.


        Bladeleafs are cruel, sadistic fey that nonetheless see themselves as guardians of the forest, and
        they often work with other dark-hearted forest beings towards that goal. They are found mostly
        in healthy woods, rich in plant life, though their own forms bespeak the desiccation of high
        autumn.

        They oppose all intrusion into protected areas of the forest, though they feel obliged to post fair
        warning; usually the skull of some tiny creature dangling from a thin vine, hardly noticeable
        without a Hard Perception test (or Difficult if the existence of such warnings is known). Once
        someone passes by this warning, whether they saw it or not, the bladeleaf considers them fair
        game.

        Bladeleafs are cruel by nature. They are not necessarily murderous, but take great delight in
        causing pain to other beings and to each other. Many have noted that the fey are, in general,
        somewhat childlike; the bladeleafs seem to embody the casual and callous cruelty of children.
        Their social order is based on unspoken allegiances and unacknowledged power structures, with
        those in charge being only tacitly acknowledged. Brutal and years-long power struggles can occur
        in so subtle a fashion that an outsider, if one could ever observe the creatures for any length of
        time, would never know they were happening.

        Combat Notes
        Bladeleafs fight first to drive away, second to cause pain, and only third to kill. They will not
        hesitate to slay if it suits their mood, but will not pursue a fleeing foe merely to kill him. They
        refrain from melee combat, instead using their magical abilities and bows to harry foes.

        Storm of Leaves: A bladeleaf can conjure a dealing storm of enchanted leaves, sharp as knives
        and just as dangerous. They can summon this storm 3 times a day and it lasts for POW/4 (round
        up) rounds. It can move up to 6 metres per round. Using a Combat Action, the bladeleaf can
        direct the storm to attack a foe and only a successful Evade test will avoid damage from this
        whirling storm of sharp leafy death. Failure results in 2D6 damage per location and a 50%
        chance of Bleeding. The leaf storm is vulnerable to fire and can be disrupted by 10 points of
        fire damage. Should the bladeleaf be attacked while the storm is in progress, he must make an
        immediate Persistence test or lose the spell as it dissipates into a harmless pile of leaves.

        Camouflage: Once per day a bladeleaf can stand completely still and blend into the background
        for POW/4 (rounded up) combat rounds, or minutes if not in combat. Only a successful Very
        Hard Perception test will allow the creature to be spotted.

        Toxin: Bladeleaf arrows are coated in venom, this venom is similar to Blade Venom on page 81
        of the Legend Core Rulebook.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                  37
                   Dice           Average               1D20       Hit Location       AP/HP
       STR         1D6+3          8                     1-3        Right Leg              -/4
       CON         1D6+10         14                    4-6        Left Leg               -/4
       SIZ         3              3                     7-9        Abdomen                -/6
       INT         3D6            10                    10-12      Chest                  -/5
       POW         2D6+6          13                    13-15      Right Arm              -/5
       DEX         2D6+11         18                    16-18      Left Arm               -/4
       CHA         2D6+5          12                    19-20      Head                   -/4




       Combat Actions             3                     Armour: None
       Damage Modifier            -1D4
       Magic Points               13                    Traits: None
       Movement                   6m (10m
                                  flying)
       Strike Rank                +15                   Common Skills: Athletics 47%, Evade 59%,
                                                        Perception 59%, Persistence 46%, Resilience
                                                        46%, Stealth 79%
                                                        Advanced Skills: Survival 47%, Track 52%

      Combat Styles
      Needling Archery (Short Bow) 56%

      Weapons
      Type 	             Range	        Size	   Reach	         Damage	                           AP/HP
      Short Bow	         80m	          L	      -	             1D6-1D4 + Poison, Impale	         4/4




 38
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Bonecracker Ogre
      This ogre wears armour made of cracked bone fragments. Gobbets of flesh and marrow hang from its
      snaggle-toothed jaws and its arms are corded with muscles like banded steel.


      The fearsome bonecrackers are a bizarre sect of ogres who feed primarily on the marrow of
      human bones. They crack the bones open with their cruel jaws and vice-like hands, lick out the
      gory insides, then hang the bones on their shirts as a form of crude splint mail. They are addicted
      to the marrow they love, and fall victim to madness if denied it for more than a few days.

      Bonecracker ogres are commonly found acting as mercenaries or battlefield scavengers. Others
      break into tombs and devour the bodies of the recently dead. Their insatiable hunger drives them
      into acts that seem foolhardy; bonecrackers have been known to creep into well-defended human
      towns to eat the bones of children. They are sometimes found working with other ogre tribes,
      but their allies know the marrow-lust of the bonecrackers and are careful to keep them well fed
      and at a distance.

      Combat Notes
      Bonecrackers prefer to pulverise their foes with their clubs, before ripping the bodies open and
      slurping the contents of the bones. They have an excellent understanding of anatomy, thanks to
      spending long hours with dismembered corpses, and use their clubs and claws to smash bones
      and tear at muscles.

      Bonecrushing Hug: Against a target smaller than itself, the bonecracker may attempt to grapple,
      as described on page 138 of the Legend Core Rulebook. Once a foe is caught in a grapple, the ogre
      makes an opposed Brawn or Unarmed test and, if successful, inflicts terrible damage on their
      enemy. Each location takes 2D6 damage, limbs are popped out of joint and the pain is so intense
      it can cause weaker opponents to pass out as well as reducing their DEX by half and inflicting
      Stun Location upon them. Healing, such as a Healing test, can remove this effect and restore an
      opponent’s DEX to normal.




 40
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                    Dice          Average              1D20       Hit Location     AP/HP
         STR        4D6+11        25                   1-3        Right Leg          4/8
         CON        4D6+2         16                   4-6        Left Leg           4/7
         SIZ        4D6+6         20                   7-9        Abdomen            4/7
         INT        3D6-5         6                    10-12      Chest              4/10
         POW        3D6-2         9                    13-15      Right Arm          4/9
         DEX        3D6-3         8                    16-18      Left Arm           4/8
         CHA        3D6-3         8                    19-20      Head               4/8




         Combat Actions           2                    Armour: Bone armour. -6 Armour Penalty.
         Damage Modifier          +1D8
         Magic Points             8                    Traits: Night Sight
         Movement                 8m
         Strike Rank              +7 (+1               Common Skills: Athletics 58%, Brawn 85%,
                                  when                 Evade 35%, Perception 45%, Persistence
                                  armoured)            23%, Resilience 87%, Stealth 37%


        Combat Styles
        Crack Crack (Great Club, Bite, Claw, Unarmed) 78%

        Weapons
        Type 	          Range	    Size	       Reach	    Damage	                       AP/HP
        Fists	          --	       M	          M	        1D6+1D8	                      As for Arm
        Giant Club	     --	       L	          L	        1D10+1D8 Stun Location	       6/10




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                   41
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Candleman	
        This creature looks like a horrific combination of candle and a human figure. A fiery wick protrudes
        from the top of its head, and its waxy features contort into a mask of pain as it notices you. Flesh or
        tallow drips from its twisted outstretched fingers.


        Candlemen are one of the more alarming denizens of a chaotic realm, a place that is ever-
        changing and has a million names that cannot be written in any hand nor spoken by any tongue.
        Physically, they are like fat candles shaped into the likeness of a man, with burning wicks growing
        from the top of their heads. This flame is actually the candleman’s life energy and when it burns
        out, the entity is destroyed.

        The waxy flesh of candlemen is highly malleable, allowing the creatures to alter their features by
        pushing and pulling at themselves. They can also use this offensively; the touch of a candleman
        transmutes flesh and bone into flowing wax, causing the most grotesque, cancerous wounds
        imaginable. Those killed by a candleman melt into puddles of entrails and bone fragments.

        Candlemen enjoy such deaths and actively seek out portals to mortal worlds. They despise the
        fundamental structure of life, the ordered binding of bone to sinew to muscle to skin. If the
        candlemen had their way, all the cities of the world would burn and all peoples melt. Until that
        day, they work as assassins, guards, spies and murderers, waiting for the flame of life to finally
        gutter out, drowned in a pool of wax.

        Combat Notes
        Candlemen can attack by merely touching a foe and using their melt abilities. If they expect to
        encounter an enemy, they transform their faces to that of a trusted friend so they can get close to
        their target; otherwise, they rely on stealth and agility to approach a foe unseen. When forced to,
        they can hurl gouts of flame by flicking their wicks at enemies.

        Melting Touch: A creature struck by a candleman’s attack which deals damage must make a
        Difficult Resilience test or begin to melt. A melting creature takes 1D6 points of damage per
        round, per location as their flesh begins to liquefy. They also begin to lose CHA at the rate of
        1D3 points per round. Each round a melting creature can make a further Difficult Resilience test
        to stave off the effects – only magical healing can restore a creature so afflicted.

        Flameflick: Using a Combat Action the candleman can hurl a gobbet of flaming wax at an
        enemy. This flame-ball does 2D6 points of fire damage to a targeted location. The grenade-like
        effect of the attack hits a five metre radius and any creature caught in the effect must make a
        successful Evade test or take 1D6 splash damage from the attack.

        Waxy Body: Candlemen are immune to all fire damage attacks. Their waxy form allows them
        to shapeshift into any humanoid creature matching their size, and they often use their malleable
        features to disguise themselves as a friend so they can launch a surprise attack.

        Quenchable: The candleman’s wick atop its head contains the flickering fire of its life energy.
        It is susceptible to being put out, using water, cold damage or even high winds. Should the
        candleman take damage from any of these sources, they ignore the damage effect but must make
        an immediate Hard Resilience test or have the flame go out. Once the flame is out, they cannot
        use Flameflick. The candleman also loses 1D6 points of CHA per round until it gutters out at
        CHA 0. The creature will then melt into a solid pool of wax and is gone. The candleman can
        relight the wick if it takes fire damage or applies a flame to its wick.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                  43
                  Dice        Average            1D20       Hit Location      AP/HP
       STR        3D6+1       11                 1-3        Right Leg          -/7
       CON        3D6+7       18                 4-6        Left Leg           -/6
       SIZ        3D6+3       14                 7-9        Abdomen            -/6
       INT        3D6+7       11                 10-12      Chest              -/9
       POW        3D6+2       13                 13-15      Right Arm          -/8
       DEX        3D6+1       12                 16-18      Left Arm           -/7
       CHA        3D6+7       11                 19-20      Head               -/7




       Combat Actions         2                  Armour: None
       Damage Modifier        +0
       Magic Points           13                 Traits: None
       Movement               8m
       Strike Rank            +12                Common Skills: Athletics 93%, Brawn 52%,
                                                 Evade 64%, Perception 95%, Persistence
                                                 66%, Resilience 91%, Stealth 98%
                                                 Advanced Skills: Disguise 67%


      Combat Styles
      Burning Man (Flameflick, Fists) 68%

      Weapons
      Type 	         Range	   Size	     Reach	     Damage	                     AP/HP
      Fists	         --	      M	        M	         1D3 Special (see above)	    As for Arm




 44
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Citywarden
      The creature that erupts out of the cobblestones seems to be made of an amalgam of parts of the city.
      Its body is built of bricks and stone blocks; it peers at you through streetlamp eyes and growls through
      its portcullis mouth.


      Citywardens are the incarnate spirits of a town or metropolis, spontaneously generated to defend
      a city against invaders and disasters. They are exceedingly rare; it takes centuries of constant
      habitation and reverence to awaken the spirit of a city and even then a magical triggering event
      of some sort is needed to induce the city into animating a portion of itself as a construct. A divine
      blessing from a god will normally do the trick, as would an inter-planar invasion or a gang of
      high-powered adventurers running riot on the city streets.

      The warden is not a construct in the normal sense of the term; it is technically a bodiless spirit
      that creates a shell for itself from the material of the city. When the citywarden lets its body
      go, the spirit sinks back down into the ground and the body flies apart, the bricks and stones
      it borrowed returning to their customary places. Most citywardens obey the commands of the
      town watch or ruling council, but others have formed their own instinctive opinions about who
      is the true authority in the town. There are tales of wardens loyally serving some beggar-child or
      thief-king, believing them to be the rightful lords of the city.

      Combat Notes
      A fight with a citywarden always begins the same way – the warden bursts up from below and
      starts smashing enemies with its mighty fists. A warden cannot go beyond the sight of the city,
      but can leave the city precincts to chase enemies away.

      Burst: Once per POW/4 rounds (rounded up), the citywarden can burst upwards with its
      Transport Through Streets ability. This is an area effect attack which can be avoided by a
      successful Difficult Evade test. Failure results in 2D6 damage to three random locations, in an
      8 metre radius from the point of arrival. The sheer force also knocks creatures who fail their test
      off their feet.

      Transport Through Streets: A citywarden can teleport almost instantaneously to any point
      in the city. It can use this ability at will, but may not leave the limits of the city. It may appear
      underground, but cannot appear above street level. Activating this ability requires a Combat
      Action and it takes a round for the citywarden to move from point A to B.

      Magic Nullification: Within four metres of the citywarden all magic simply fails, as the creature
      is surrounded by a very powerful anti-magic field.

      Heal Thyself: Unlike other constructs, a city warden heals naturally, albeit slowly. It heals one
      hit point per location every week, so long as it stays buried and immobile within the city.




 46
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                       Dice        Average            1D20       Hit Location         AP/HP
         STR           3D6+19      30                 1-3        Right Leg             7/10
         CON           3D6+11      22                 4-6        Left Leg              7/9
         SIZ           3D6+15      26                 7-9        Abdomen               7/9
         INT           3D6+7       18                 10-12      Chest                 7/12
         POW           3D6+1       12                 13-15      Right Arm             7/11
         DEX           3D6+4       15                 16-18      Left Arm              7/10
         CHA           3D6+1       12                 19-20      Head                  7/10




         Combat Actions            3                  Armour: Supernaturally tough stone. No
                                                      Armour Penalty.
         Damage Modifier           +1D12
         Magic Points              12                 Traits: None
         Movement                  8m
         Strike Rank               +17                Common Skills: Athletics 50%, Brawn 90%,
                                                      Evade 70%, Perception 87%, Persistence
                                                      54%, Resilience 60%

        Combat Styles
        City Smash (Fists) %135

        Weapons
        Type 	            Range	   Size	     Reach	   Damage	                   AP/HP
        Giant Fists	      --	      L	        L	       1D10+1D12	                As for Arm




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                 47
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Dissolute	
        It shambles like a zombie which is nearing the end of its unnatural existence, with rotted flesh barely
        clinging to cracked and discoloured bones. Then, with a sickening lurch, it collapses into a grotesque,
        foul smelling mire of rotted meat and organs, flecked with fragments of skeleton… but that mire
        continues to edge forward.


        The dissolute is the remains of a humanoid slain by an ooze while the humanoid was suffering
        from a tainted effect, such as ability drain or a spell that saps energy.

        Dissolutes wander the dark under-realms where they were slain; if created above ground, instinct
        will drive them below. Their ability to seep and flow through narrow passages makes them ideally
        suited for a cave dwelling lifestyle, and they have no trouble finding victims among the many
        underground creatures.

        Combat Notes
        A dissolute will usually trail a potential victim for some time, following in its ooze form, until
        it senses the proper time to strike. Then it will re-corporate into humanoid form and close to
        melee range, having little fear of normal weapons. If forced to confront a number of individuals,
        it will begin with its cadaverous explosion ability, and then destroy whoever is left in hand-to-
        hand combat.

        Acid Touch: When the dissolute hits with a melee attack it causes 1D2 points of Weak Acid
        damage to the target.

        Cadaverous Explosion: The dissolute has a particularly nasty attack it can perform once per
        day; it builds up to a sudden and sickly explosion which sends gobbets of flesh, bone and gristle
        into a 20 metre radius. All creatures in that area of effect must make a Difficult Evade test or be
        struck by 3D6 points of damage to three random locations. Furthermore they take 1D4 Strong
        Acid damage per round until it is treated. Acid damage rules are on page 76 of the Legend Core
        Rulebook.

        Viscous Form: At will, a dissolute can collapse into a revolting mire of putrefied flesh and
        shattered bone. In this form, it has the mobility of an ooze, able to flow through narrow passages
        up to four inches wide or pull itself slowly up walls (climb speed six metres, but cannot attack.

        Weapon Dissolution: When a dissolute is struck by a melee weapon, magical or not, the weapon
        takes 1D4 points of Strong Acid damage. The damage is done to the AP of the weapon first; until
        it reaches 0 then any further damage is applied to the HP.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                  49
                  Dice         Average         1D20       Hit Location             AP/HP
       STR        4D6+2        16              1-3        Right Leg                 -/6
       CON        3D6+4        15              4-6        Left Leg                  -/5
       SIZ        2D6+4        11              7-9        Abdomen                   -/5
       INT        6            6               10-12      Chest                     -/8
       POW        2D6+4        11              13-15      Right Arm                 -/7
       DEX        3D6+3        14              16-18      Left Arm                  -/6
       CHA        2D6+3        10              19-20      Head                      -/6




       Combat Actions          2               Armour: None
       Damage Modifier         +1D2
       Magic Points            11              Traits: None
       Movement                8m (6m
                               when
                               climbing)
       Strike Rank             +10             Common Skills: Athletics 48%, Brawn 57%,
                                               Evade 48%, Perception 42%, Persistence
                                               35%, Resilience 40%, Stealth 60%

      Combat Styles
      Acid Fists (Fists) 65%

      Weapons
      Type 	    Range	 Size	        Reach	   Damage	                 AP/HP
      Fists	    --	    M	           M	       1D3+1D2 Acid	           As for Arm	




 50
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Dungeon Stalker
      This creature is wrapped in tendrils of shadow, so it is hard to make out its features. Its limbs are
      long and sinuous; its head appears eyeless but crenulated with sensory organs. Long claws grip and
      scratch the stone as it moves.


      According to their legends, whispered in their curious language of scratches and sounds like
      dripping water, the dungeon stalkers were once adventurers from the bright kingdom of the
      surface. They went on a great quest into the underworld, to retrieve some wonder that was
      then vitally needed, but today is forgotten dust. For years, they wandered the lightless caves
      and labyrinths that wound through the bowels of the earth like the path of some ancient worm.
      When their torches ran out, they turned to spells. When their food ran out, they turned to spells.
      When their fires ran out, they turned to each other for warmth.

      Seven years after they left the surface, the first child was born to them, a child whose blood and
      bone were built from magic. It had no eyes, but looked at them from the shadows. It was the
      first dungeon stalker.

      It kept its parents alive just long enough so they could sire and bear it a mate.

      The numbers of the stalkers grew and grew over the centuries as they slowly, blindly made their
      way back towards the surface. Now, they are very close to the bright kingdom but are unwilling
      to step into the burning light. They lurk in the tombs and mazes just under the earth, feeding
      on flesh and fear, living for the hunt and the kill. Sometimes, they whisper to each other of the
      sacrifices their ancestors made for the surface kingdom and how every kill the stalkers make is
      just a fraction of the blood price owed as their inheritance.

      Combat Notes
      Dungeon stalkers are cunning adversaries. They choose their battlegrounds very carefully, waiting
      until their targets are resting or engaged in combat with another monster before attacking. They
      also know when to retreat; a stalker will not attack a party in the morning, when they are fully
      healed and alert, but will instead hold back and wait until their strength has been sapped, and
      their bodies are tired from a day’s exploration.

      Confusion: Anyone damaged by a stalker’s claw attack must make Persistence test or suffer
      the effects of confusion on page 79 of the Legend Core Rulebook. This effect lasts for POW/4
      (rounded up) rounds before it wears off. Stalkers will try and scatter a group to confuse them all.

      Darkness Mastery: A stalker is not affected by spells which cause darkness, and it can use
      darkness and shadows like a cloak. In darkness or shadows the stalker’s Stealth skill gains a +10%
      bonus.

      Corridor Skitter: When moving, a stalker may make an Athletics test. If successful, the stalker
      may move along the roof or walls of a room as if they were a flat surface. If the surface is
      tricky, such as ice or slime, then the test becomes a Difficult one. The stalker can double their
      movement rate if there are no obstructions when skittering.

      Dungeon Sense: A stalker can automatically detect any movement within 35 metres. It also
      knows the most direct route between it and the movement; it essentially has a perfect and
      constantly updated mental map of its surroundings in the dungeon.


 52
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                    Dice           Average            1D20         Hit Location         AP/HP
         STR        3D6+1          12                 1-3          Right Leg             6/5
         CON        3D6            11                 4-6          Left Leg              6/4
         SIZ        3D6+1          12                 7-9          Abdomen               6/4
         INT        3D6+7          16                 10-12        Chest                 6/7
         POW        3D6+1          12                 13-15        Right Arm             6/6
         DEX        4D6+4          18                 16-18        Left Arm              6/5
         CHA      3D6-1            10                 19-20        Head                  6/5




         Combat Actions            3                  Armour: Very tough bone natural armour.
                                                      No Armour Penalty.
         Damage Modifier           +0
         Magic Points              12                 Traits: Dungeon sense
         Movement                  8m
         Strike Rank               +17                Common Skills: Athletics 70%, Brawn 40%,
                                                      Evade 76%, Perception 48%, Persistence
                                                      54%, Resilience 40%, Stealth 89%
                                                      Advanced Skills: Survival 62%, Track 69%

        Combat Styles
        Stalker Claws (Claw) 75%

        Weapons
        Type 	    Range	     Size	           Reach	   Damage	              AP/HP
        Claw	     --	        M	              M	       1D6 Bleed	           As for Arm




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                 53
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Emergents
        The common elementals encountered on the various planes are essentially crude creatures,
        being nothing more than a lump of elemental matter fused with an animating spirit. Not all
        elemental life is quite so simple – just as oozes and slimes give way to higher forms such as elves
        or humans, so too do primitive elemental forms lead to the rise of the higher elemental entities
        called emergents. They are normally found only in the purest regions of their native plane,
        but have the intelligence and ambition to travel. The emergents are scions of their race, the
        champions and leaders of the elementals. Most are concerned with the rule of their kingdoms,
        wars against genies, or punishing wizards from the material plane who summon too much and
        too freely, but others have their own agendas. They tend to appear in humanoid guise and can
        surround themselves with their chosen element.


        Emergent of Air
        This creature looks like a tight whirlwind of fast-spinning air, surmounted by the upper body of a
        translucent, slim humanoid.


        Air emergents are proud and often cruel beings; they think exceedingly quickly and are much too
        impatient to deal with the slow clods of muck that are other beings. An air emergent will only
        deign to speak to lesser creatures when it suits the emergent’s purpose and then only for a brief
        time. They spend most of their days riding vast hurricanes. Few material creatures can penetrate
        the fierce winds into the heart of the storm, so to the emergents these hurricanes are like exclusive
        courts where they will be untroubled by lesser beings.

        Combat Notes
        Air emergents can hurl fistfuls of compressed air that explode violently when they hit a foe. They
        can also control the air around them, but only bother to use this ability against foes they respect.
        Lesser beings are just pummelled into oblivion.

        Air Burst: This attack has a range of 35 metres, but can also be used in melee; it produces a
        massive gust of wind that can knock enemies over. If a foe fails a Difficult Evade test, they take
        1D6 damage to three random locations and are knocked down.

        Tempest: The air surrounding an air emergent is wild and storm-tossed. Other flying creatures
        have their flying speed halved within 18 metres of an air emergent, though air elementals are
        immune to this effect. The storm causes 2D6 damage to four random locations if a Hard Evade
        test is failed.

        Master of the Air: An air emergent can command the air around it. It may cause the air to stop
        carrying a target’s voice, as if the target was afflicted with a silencing effect or order it not to carry
        breath to his lungs, causing him to suffocate as if drowning as described on page 76 of the Legend
        Core Rulebook. The emergent may only issue one command at a time and may only have one
        command active at a time. The command takes no time at all to issue, but the emergent must
        make a Hard Persistence test if hurt to maintain it.

        Haste: An air emergent may cast Haste as per the Sorcerer spell on page 200 of the Legend Core
        Rulebook for POW/4 times per day (rounded down), but only on itself and other air elementals.
        The spell is cast at a Magnitude of four.



Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                     55
                  Dice         Average            1D20        Hit Location       AP/HP
       STR        3D6+5        16                 1-3         Right Leg             -/6
       CON        3D6+2        13                 4-6         Left Leg              -/6
       SIZ        3D6+7        14                 7-9         Abdomen               -7
       INT        3D6+7        14                 10-12       Chest                 -/8
       POW        3D6+2        13                 13-15       Right Arm             -/5
       DEX        2D6+13       20                 16-18       Left Arm              -/5
       CHA        3D6+7        14                 19-20       Head                  -/6




       Combat Actions          3                  Armour: None.
       Damage Modifier         +1D2
       Magic Points            13                 Traits: None.
       Movement                18m (Fly)
       Strike Rank             +17                Common Skills: Athletics 55%, Evade 100%,
                                                  Perception 92%, Persistence 46%, Resilience
                                                  46%, Stealth %109


      Combat Styles
      Dervish Wind (Air Fist) 100%

      Weapons
      Type 	               Range	    Size	   Reach	     Damage	           AP/HP
      Air Fist	            --	       M	      T	         1D6+1D2	          As for Arm
      Air Fist Ranged	     40m	      M	      --	        1D6+1D2	          As for Arm




 56
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Emergent of Earth	
      This creature looks like a mobile statue. Its legs merge into the earth it walks on… or through.


      Earth emergents are the most and the least approachable of their kind. They have some tolerance
      for lower creatures; while they see mortals as mongrel muck, they are at least mongrel muck
      with some interesting things to say. This attitude means earth emergents are seen as the black
      sheep of the emergent nobility and usually scorned by their peers. They are considered the least
      approachable because it is hard to walk up to an earth emergent, as the ground shakes and
      shudders around them.


      Combat Notes
      Earth emergents are scrappy fighters, charging into the midst of a fight and sending their enemies
      flying. They smash their foes to pulp with their huge rocky fists. Most of their other defensive
      abilities are activated unconsciously; an earth emergent barely notices other foes falling or being
      stuck in the mud as he gleefully hammers his target.

      Shuddering Walk: The ground quakes as an earth emergent walks. Anyone within 10 feet of a
      moving emergent must make a Hard Acrobatics test or fall over.

      Crushing Fist: Any downed targets struck by an earth emergent are crushed between its stony
      fists and the ground and suffer an extra +1D6 damage.

      Master of the Earth: An earth emergent can command the earth around it. It may cause the
      earth to move beneath a target’s feet thus increasing the Difficulty of any Evade, Acrobatics or
      Athletics tests or order it to hold him; the target is subject to a Holdfast spell as per page 201 of
      the Legend Core Rulebook. Assume the creature has a Sorcery skill of 90% for calculating the SIZ
      of foes affected. The emergent may only issue one command at a time and may only have one
      command active at a time. The command takes no time at all to issue, but the emergent must
      make a Hard Persistence test if hurt to maintain it.

      Rocky Heart: An earth emergent may cast Enhance (CON) POW/4 (rounded down) times
      per day, but only on itself and other earth elementals. The spell is cast as if the emergent had a
      Sorcery skill of 90% and is on page 198 of the Legend Core Rulebook.




 58
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                    Dice            Average            1D20        Hit Location       AP/HP
         STR        2D6+13          20                 1-3         Right Leg           5/8
         CON        2D6+13          20                 4-6         Left Leg            5/8
         SIZ        2D6+13          20                 7-9         Abdomen             5/9
         INT        3D6+7           14                 10-12       Chest               5/10
         POW        3D6+6           13                 13-15       Right Arm           5/7
         DEX        2D6+1           8                  16-18       Left Arm            5/7
         CHA        3D6+7           14                 19-20       Head                5/8




         Combat Actions             2                  Armour: 5 points of supernatural rock. No
                                                       armour penalty.
         Damage Modifier            +1D6
         Magic Points               13                 Traits: None.
         Movement                   10m
         Strike Rank                +11                Common Skills: Athletics 34%, Brawn
                                                       60%, Evade 30%, Perception 92%,
                                                       Persistence 46%, Resilience 100%

        Combat Styles
        Smash and Bash (Earthen Fists) 88%

        Weapons
        Type	              Range	         Size	   Reach	       Damage	            AP/HP
        Earthen Fists	     --	            M	      M	           1D6+1D6	           As for Arm




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                   59
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Emergent of Fire	
        This creature has a humanoid’s upper body, but moves on a pillar of flame.


        Fire emergents consider themselves the best of their kind and treat other emergents as servants
        or, at best, rustic cousins who really are not too bright or well bred. The fire courts are full of
        intrigue and gilded cruelty; every emergent constantly plots and conspires against its fellows,
        and outsiders like mortals or other emergents are considered little more than buffoons or pawns.
        Of all the emergents, the fires are by far the most likely to consort with others powers and turn
        toward evil ideals.

        Combat Notes
        Fire emergents never attack directly; they always fight from behind a veritable wall of fire
        elemental servants and bodyguards. Their usual tactic is to begin by testing the defences of a
        foe with a flame pulse, as they know defensive spells can block most magical attacks. If the foe
        is not protected from this then they will use their minions to soften them up, before wading in
        themselves. If the fight turns sour they will retreat and attempt to block any pursuit using their
        command of fire.

        Flame Pulse: This attack has a range of 35 metres, but can also be used in melee. The blast deals
        1D8 points of fire damage to all locations.

        Scorching Presence: An aura of magical heat surrounds a fire emergent. This aura deals 1D6
        points of fire damage per location each round to anyone within five metres of the emergent and
        also decreases the damage dealt by any cold attacks to creatures within the aura by half.

        Master of the Fire: A fire emergent can command the flames around it. It may cause the heat to
        become more intense within a target increasing the damage from any fire-based attack by 50%)
        or order it to depart from him, the target suffers the effects of Magnitude 4 Hinder spell on
        page 200 of the Legend Core Rulebook, assuming the emergent has a Sorcery skill of 90%. The
        emergent may only issue one command at a time and may only have one command active at a
        time. The command takes no time at all to issue, but the emergent must make a Hard Persistence
        test if hurt to maintain it.

        Storm of Fire: A fire emergent may call down a rain of fire over a 10 metre radius. Every target
        in the radius that is affected by fire is subject to 2D6 fire damage per location for three rounds.
        The fire damage can be halved with a successful Difficult Evade test. The emergent can use this
        ability POW/4 (rounded down) times per day.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                              61
                  Dice         Average         1D20       Hit Location      AP/HP
       STR        2D6+9        16              1-3        Right Leg           -/7
       CON        2D6+9        16              4-6        Left Leg            -/7
       SIZ        2D6=9        16             7-9         Abdomen             -/8
       INT        2D6+7        14             10-12       Chest               -/9
       POW        2D6+6        13             13-15       Right Arm           -/6
       DEX      2D6+9          16             16-18       Left Arm            -/6
       CHA      2D6+7          14             19-20       Head                -/7




       Combat Actions          3              Armour: None.
       Damage Modifier         +1D4
       Magic Points            13             Traits: None.
       Movement                15m
       Strike Rank             +15            Common Skills: Athletics 47%, Evade 92%,
                                              Perception 92%, Persistence 46%, Resilience
                                              62%

      Combat Styles
      Flame Lord (Flame Pulse) 82%

      Weapons
      Type 	              Range	      Size	   Reach	     Damage	         AP/HP
      Flame Pulse	        --	         M	      M	         1D8+1D4	        As for Arm
      Pulse Ranged	       35m	        M	      --	        1D8+1D4	        As for Arm




 62
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Emergent of Water
      This creature looks like a standing eight-foot-tall wave, with a humanoid shape inside it.


      Water emergents are the quietest and most reserved of the emergents; they have the least interest
      in the courtly games and intrigues of their kind, although they maintain a great love for ritual
      and ceremony. They are the most pious and contemplative of their kind, and produce the vast
      majority of emergent priesthood. Like the other emergents, they have little traffic with mixed-
      element beings like creatures from the mortal world, but this is more due to the emergents’ habit
      of making their homes in eternal whirlpools or in the depths of the watery planes and worlds
      than any distaste for humanoids.

      Combat Notes
      Water emergents are careful combatants, preferring to retreat to a place of safety unless they can
      choose the time and place of an encounter. Understandably, they prefer to fight underwater if
      at all possible, using their control of water to flood areas if necessary and make the fight uneven
      for their opponents.

      Water Strike: This blast of water has a range of 35 metres, but can also be used in melee as well.
      The sheer force of the blow knocks air out of the victim’s lungs; creatures holding their breath
      must make a Difficult Resilience test or have the air knocked out of their lungs; this causes them
      to gasp for breath and forfeit their next combat turn.

      Condensation: Water emergents are constantly surrounded by a water haze. They have a bonus
      of 10% to their Evade skill because of this.

      Master of Water: A water emergent can command the liquids around it. It may cause the water
      not to support a target, he cannot swim or float and any movement in the water becomes 0
      metres, or order it to crawl up and choke them if the target has any moisture, even rainwater,
      covering his face, he begins to drown; see the rules on page 76 of the Legend Core Rulebook. The
      emergent may only issue one command at a time and may only have one command active at a
      time. The command takes no time at all to issue, but the emergent must make a Hard Persistence
      test if hurt to maintain it.

      Control Water: A water emergent may Animate Water, as per the Sorcery spell on page 195 of
      the Legend Core Rulebook. Consider the emergent’s Sorcery skill to be 90%.




 64
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                    Dice          Average          1D20        Hit Location       AP/HP
         STR        2D6+9         16               1-3         Right Leg            -/7
         CON        2D6+9         16               4-6         Left Leg             -/7
         SIZ        2D6=9         16               7-9         Abdomen              -/8
         INT        2D6+7         14               10-12       Chest                -/9
         POW        2D6+6         13               13-15       Right Arm            -/6
         DEX        2D6+9         16               16-18       Left Arm             -/6
         CHA       2D6+7          14               19-20       Head                 -/7




         Combat Actions           3                Armour: None.
         Damage Modifier          +1D4
         Magic Points             13               Traits: None.
         Movement                 15m (30m
                                  Swim)
         Strike Rank              +15              Common Skills: Athletics 47%, Evade 102%,
                                                   Perception 92%, Persistence 46%, Resilience
                                                   62%, Swim 90%

        Combat Styles
        Water Margin (Water Strike) 85%

        Weapons
        Type 	              Range	        Size	   Reach	      Damage	          AP/HP
        Water Strike	       --	           M	      M	          1D8+1D4	         As for Arm
        Strike Ranged	      35m	          M	      --	         1D8+1D4	         As for Arm




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                 65
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Eyeless	
        A figure emerges out of the gloom, dressed in a hooded cloak. Something about its eyes seems… odd.


        When a new monster is discovered by adventurers, sages and scholars crawl out of the woodwork
        to offer theories on where it came from; a denizen of other worlds, the product of sorcerous
        experimentation or magical catastrophe, or a hybrid of two existing species. When the eyeless
        were first encountered, though, no sage dared suggest an origin for the horror. Sometimes the
        world just throws up things best left ignored.

        Eyeless are almost human; they look like thin, gaunt figures with fingers slightly too long for their
        hands. They are almost always hairless, although some do sprout a wiry, slightly slimy growth
        on their heads. Their most distinctive feature is what gives them their names; the eyeless have
        empty eye sockets, ringed with scorched flesh. It looks as though their eyes were burnt out with
        searing-hot pokers. In truth, the eyeless never had eyes they did not steal from other creatures.

        Eyeless dwell in the alleys and the sewers, stalking humans. They are connoisseurs of sight and
        colour, hunting those with distinctive or beautiful eyes. When an eyeless finds a suitable donor,
        the whole eyeless gang collaborate to kidnap the victim, who is dragged to the lair of the eyeless
        and bound. The eyeless then cuts out the victim’s eyes and places them in its own sockets. The
        victim must be kept alive for as long as possible, because as soon as the victim dies, the eyes
        begin to rot. Younger eyeless are therefore pressed into service to care for the kidnapped victims,
        treating them with skin-crawling gentleness to keep them fed and free from disease.

        The eyeless are also encountered as guards and spies in the service of more powerful beings. Their
        payment is obvious.

        Combat Notes
        Eyeless use their ghastly stare to blind opponents before attacking. Gangs of eyeless are skilled
        at co-ordinating their attacks; by surrounding their foes, they can ensure there is nowhere the
        enemies can safely look.

        Ghastly Stare: Eyeless have a gaze attack with a range of 10 metres. Anyone caught in the gaze
        must make an immediate Difficult Persistence test or be drawn to the stare, then stunned and
        blinded for POW/4 (rounded down) rounds. Stunned and blinded foes cannot move, react or
        use magic at all.

        Steal Eyes: An eyeless can remove the eyes of a living victim using its claws and place the eyes in
        its own socket. It gains any special vision based traits or talents of the individual. For example, if
        the eyes grant Dark Sight, then the eyeless gains that ability too.

        True Sight: Eyeless have a mystical talent which allows them to see as if they were sighted. This
        ability allows them to see the truth which is hidden, invisible creatures and magical protections.

        Skills: When an eyeless has a pair of human eyes installed, it gains a +10% bonus to its Disguise
        skill.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                 67
                  Dice         Average              1D20        Hit Location       AP/HP
       STR        3D6+5        16                   1-3         Right Leg                -/6
       CON        2D6+6        13                   4-6         Left Leg                 -/6
       SIZ        2D6+7        14                   7-9         Abdomen                  -/7
       INT        2D6+3        10                   10-12       Chest                    -/8
       POW        2D6+6        13                   13-15       Right Arm                -/5
       DEX        3D6          11                   16-18       Left Arm                 -/5
       CHA      2D6+5          12                   19-20       Head                     -/6




       Combat Actions          2                    Armour: Any armour the Eyeless can wear.
       Damage Modifier         +1D2
       Magic Points            13                   Traits: None.
       Movement                8m
       Strike Rank             11                   Common Skills: Athletics 40%, Evade 50%,
                                                    Perception 60%, Persistence 65%, Resilience
                                                    55%, Stealth 50%, Unarmed 49%
                                                    Advanced Skills: Disguise 50% (60% with
                                                    human eyes), Track 53%

      Combat Styles
      Eye Gouger (Dagger) 77%

      Weapons
      Type 	          Range	       Size	   Reach	         Damage	           AP/HP
      Dagger	         --	          S	      S	             1D4+1 +1D2	       6/8
      Claw	           --	          S	      T	             1D4 +1D2	         As for Arm




 68
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Fingerfetch	
      You see a pair of disembodied floating hands, glowing dimly as they move towards your throat.


      Fingerfetches are a minor species of undead, said to be the spirits of dead thieves. They have a
      connection to the tombs and belongings of thieves, and are often encountered near such items.
      Each fingerfetch consists of a pair of almost invisible hands, with nothing in-between. They
      are instinctive creatures, curiously poking and prodding anything they encounter. They also
      instinctively claw at any living creatures they come across; the path of a fingerfetch can be traced
      with the corpses of strangled rats and birds.

      The entities are too flighty to be easily controlled and too foolish to be of use as manual labour.
      Malicious necromancers sometimes scatter fingerfetches around their domains to strangle
      sleeping intruders.

      Combat Notes
      Fingerfetches are relatively weak creatures, incapable of inflicting much damage to their enemies.
      They sometimes try to throttle living creatures to death, but lack the strength to do so quickly.
      Their standard tactic is to creep along and wait until their victims are sleeping or distracted
      before striking.

      Throttle: When a fingerfetch hits with both claw attacks, it may attempt to put the opponent
      into a throat-lock. The opponent must make a Difficult Resilience test to pull the hands free,
      with failure resulting in the character suffering the effects of asphyxiation on page 76 of the
      Legend Core Rulebook.

      Invisibility: A fingerfetch is naturally invisible. The hands become visible when the creature
      attacks, but it becomes invisible again in any round during which it does not make an attack.
      The Games Master may allow a Hard Perception test to allow Player Characters to detect these
      little monsters.




 70
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                    Dice          Average               1D20        Hit Location        AP/HP
         STR        1D6+2         6                     1-10        Right Hand            -/1
         CON        3             3                     11-20       Left Hand             -/1
         SIZ        3             3
         INT        1D6+4         8
         POW        0             0
         DEX        3D6+7         18




         Combat Actions           3                     Armour: None.
         Damage Modifier          -1D6
         Magic Points             0                     Traits: None.
         Movement                 15m (fly)
         Strike Rank              +13                   Common Skills: Athletics 64%, Evade 61%,
                                                        Perception 38%, Persistence 65%, Resilience
                                                        40%, Stealth 66%, Unarmed 70%


        Combat Styles
        The Thing (Hands) 70%

        Weapons
        Type 	 Range	 Size	 Reach	            Damage		AP/HP
        Claw	 --	     M	    M	                1D6-1D6 (always does 1 point of damage)	 As for Hand




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                      71
      Flaygaunt	
      The figure before you seems to unfold. At first, it seems to be spreading wings, but you quickly realise
      this is just the flesh of its back stretching out and peeling away from its body. With a gleam of hunger
      and malice in its barren eyes, its arms distend and reach out for you hungrily.


      The flaygaunt is a carrion eater that exists to consume the bodies of the dead of any species.
      They are not always discerning about their prey and think nothing of ensuring any creature they
      come across becomes a meal sooner rather than later. Their attacks leave stripped skeletons still
      filled with internal organs, as flaygaunts only consume the skin and muscles of their victims.
      They have no taste for other organic matter, leaving everything else behind in their never-ending
      search for new sources of food.

      This behaviour often causes other creatures, usually other carrion eaters or undead, to lair near a
      flaygaunt, hoping to loot the spoils of their kills. Flaygaunts typically leave such beasts alone so
      long as they appear after a meal instead of before one. Flaygaunts are impossible to negotiate with
      and do not recognise bonds of friendship or alliance; this makes such symbiotic relationships
      unions of convenience only.

      Combat Notes
      Flaygaunts adore combat, though they prefer to find their food already dead and rotting. Their
      touch causes skin and muscles to fly apart from the rest of their victim’s bodies, causing death in
      a spectacularly gruesome manner, something they never tire of seeing. Flaygaunts are virtually
      powerless against opponents they cannot use their flensing powers against and will always flee
      rather than face them in combat. If they cannot flee, they will surrender if possible but will
      constantly seek escape whenever they can rather than remain in captivity.

      Flesh Lash: A flaygaunt can extend its skin out to a distance of five metres away from its body,
      extending their reach. Usually flaygaunts prefer to fight unarmed since they cannot use their
      Flense ability when carrying a weapon. Due to their skin’s flexible nature they gain a bonus of
      +20% on any test used to escape grapples or other hold/escape type moves.

      Flense: If a flaygaunt manages to strike a foe with its unarmed attack, it can choose to flense that
      victim instead of slamming them with its fleshy fists. The victim must make a successful Hard
      Resilience test or suffer 1D6 points of cutting damage across three random locations, as well as
      being subject to the Bleed Combat Manoeuvre if the unarmed attack was a critical hit.

      Drain: For POW/4 (round down) times per day the flaygaunt can attempt to suck the strength
      from the victim. This is resolved during an attack where the creature foregoes a flense attempt,
      and can exchange this for a drain – the victim must make an immediate Difficult Resilience test
      and if they fail, they lose 1D6 points of STR which can only be recovered magically. If the victim
      ever hits 0 STR then they are instantly killed as their body flies apart in an explosively messy
      manner, allowing the flaygaunt to consume all the tasty bits of flesh.




 72
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                      Dice            Average          1D20        Hit Location          AP/HP
         STR          2D6+11          18               1-3         Right Leg               -/7
         CON          2D6+9           16               4-6         Left Leg                -/7
         SIZ          2D6+10          17               7-9         Abdomen                 -/9
         INT          2D6+3           10               10-12       Chest                   -/8
         POW          2D6+5           13               13-15       Right Arm               -/6
         DEX          2D6+11          18               16-18       Left Arm                -/6
         CHA          2D6+3           10               19-20       Head                    -/7




         Combat Actions               3                Armour: None.
         Damage Modifier              +1D4
         Magic Points                 13               Traits: None.
         Movement                     8m
         Strike Rank                  +14              Common Skills: Athletics 60%, Evade 71%,
                                                       Perception 72%, Persistence 90%, Resilience
                                                       85%, Stealth 80%, Unarmed 80%

        Combat Styles
        Flesh Weaver (Fists, Flesh Lash) 80%

        Weapons
        Type 	               Range	        Size	   Reach	       Damage	               AP/HP
        Fists	               --	           M	      M	           1D6+1D4	              As for Arm
        Flesh Lash	          5m	           M	      --	          1D6+1D4 Bleed	        As for Arm




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                     73
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Harpooner
        The large grey lump on the ceiling is nothing more than a slightly-unusual rock formation... until it
        moves with surprising speed. Tendrils tipped with sharp bone fly outwards, smashing into the ground
        below. With unexpected grace, it scurries down the wall and rears up on the ground, a creature
        somewhat akin to a hornless, eyeless, rhinoceros of soft, slightly runny clay. Spikes protrude from its
        shoulders.


        The harpooner is an odd dweller of caverns, a creature evolved to pluck prey from a distance.
        It is a feared predator in the upper reaches, though it avoids the far more deadly creatures that
        lurk below. Orcs, goblins and dwarves alike have learned to carefully scour the larger caverns for
        signs of its presence, such as slightly off-colour rocks or the stony nests the creatures make to
        nurture their young.

        Combat Notes
        The harpooner will lurk silently on walls or ceiling until it senses prey. It will then launch its
        harpoon-like tendrils, and will haul the prey in to be devoured, counting on paralytic poison to
        render its victim helpless. It will usually scurry away once it has captured a meal, waiting until it
        is sure it is alone to devour in peace.

        Harpoon: The harpooner gets its name from its two harpoon-like tendrils, one on each shoulder.
        When retracted, they look like forward-facing horns. As a ranged attack, it can fire one or both
        at any target within 15 metres.

        Paralysis: If the harpooner succeeds with a harpoon attack, whether or not the victim is impaled,
        he will be injected with paralytic venom. Use Blade Venom on page 81 of the Legend Core
        Rulebook.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                  75
                 Dice         Average            1D20        Hit Location           AP/HP
       STR       2D6+11       18                 1-2         Right Hind Leg           4/7
       CON       3D6+5        16                 3-4         Left Hind Leg            4/7
       SIZ       2D6+10       17                 5-7         Hindquarters             4/8
       INT       5            5                  8-10        Forequarters             4/9
       POW       2D6+6        13                 11-13       Right Front Leg          4/6
       DEX       2D6+3        10                 14-16       Left Front Leg           4/6
                                                 17-20       Head                     4/7




       Combat Actions         3                  Armour: Natural rock. No Armour Penalty.
       Damage Modifier        +1D4
       Magic Points           13                 Traits: Dark Sight, Night Sight, Poison.
       Movement               12m
       Strike Rank            +7                 Common Skills: Athletics 65%, Evade 70%,
                                                 Perception 50%, Persistence 69%, Resilience
                                                 90%, Stealth 70%, Unarmed 70%

      Combat Styles
      Rock Harpoon (Harpoon, Bite, Claw) 90%

      Weapons
      Type	          Range	   Size	     Reach	         Damage	                 AP/HP
      Bite	          --	      L	        T	             1D8+1D4	                As for Head
      Claw	          --	      M	        M	             1D6+1D4	                As for Arm
      Harpoon	       15m	     M	        --	            1D6+1D4 Impale	         As for Head




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Headless Screamer
        This creature looks like a ragged zombie, all pale skin and torn garments. It screams and gibbers as it
        approaches and you can see a livid red scar across the necrotic skin of its neck.


        Headless screamers arise from corpses of those who were buried beheaded, such as the victims
        of execution or those who died in a gruesome manner on the battlefield. As they are among the
        more intelligent and dangerous forms of lesser undead, many evil necromancers behead and
        desecrate the bodies of their foes before entombing them. The screamers are cruel and chaotic
        beings, preferring to torment and terrify their enemies instead of merely clawing them to death.
        Some screamers have been encountered riding skeletal horses or even demon mounts, although
        such horrors are rare.

        The long claws of screamers are perfectly suited for digging into flesh and prising vertebrae apart,
        allowing them to quickly and efficiently separate the head from neck of fallen enemies.

        Combat Notes
        Headless screamers can throw their heads with alarming accuracy. The heads they throw do not
        have to be their own – the body holds the screamer’s intelligence and animating spirit, not the
        head, so many screamers carry four or five heads to use as spare ammunition. The head is imbued
        with unnatural life when thrown, screaming and snapping as it flies.

        Thrown Head: A thrown head has a range of six metres, behaves like a grenade-like missile and
        deals 1D6 points of damage to anyone struck by it across four random locations as it releases a
        burst of dark magical energy, a successful Resilience test can mitigate this damage to half. The
        head can attempt to establish a grapple as per the rules on page 138 of the Legend Core Rulebook.
        If the head latches on, it will continue to bite the victim for 1D4 points of damage per round
        until removed with a Hard Brawn test.

        Scream: A headless screamer may scream out of the air-hole at the top of its neck; anyone with
        10 metres of the screamer must make a Difficult Persistence test or be shaken with fear. The
        victim cannot attack the screamer for 1D6 rounds and must seek to get as far away from the
        creature as possible, even fleeing from battle. Creatures/beings who are unaffected by sonic-based
        attacks are immune to this effect.

        Retrieve Head: A screamer can telekinetically retrieve any fallen heads within 10 metres. This
        does not cost a Combat Action.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                  77
                  Dice         Average         1D20        Hit Location          AP/HP
       STR        2D6+8        15              1-3         Right Leg              -/4
       CON        1D6          4               4-6         Left Leg               -/4
       SIZ        2D6+6        13              7-9         Abdomen                -/5
       INT        1D6+4        8               10-12       Chest                  -/6
       POW        2D6+6        13              13-15       Right Arm              -/3
       DEX      2D6+8          15              16-18       Left Arm               -/3
                                               19-20       Head                   -/4




       Combat Actions          2               Armour: None.
       Damage Modifier         +1D2
       Magic Points            13              Traits: Dark Sight, Night Sight
       Movement                8m
       Strike Rank             +12             Common Skills: Athletics 60%, Evade 73%,
                                               Perception 57%, Persistence 70%, Resilience
                                               40%, Stealth 68%, Unarmed 70%

      Combat Styles
      Heads Up (Bite, Claw, Lob Head) 70%

      Weapons
      Type	           Range	        Size	   Reach	          Damage	              AP/HP
      Bite	           --	           S	      T	              1D6+1D2	             As for Head
      Claw	           --	           M	      T	              1D6+1D2	             As for Arm




 78
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Hearthfire Elemental
      The fire roaring in the inn’s large fireplace casts a cheery glow throughout the room, and fills the
      common area with warmth which seems to keep out the harsh chill outside. However, something
      within the flames seems to be moving and the dancing tongues of fire and wisps of smoke often seem
      to come together in the semblance of a face.


      A hearthfire elemental is curious creature from a fire-laden home which has, for reasons of
      its own, taken up residence in a fireplace, cookpit or similar area on the mortal worlds. In
      personality, it is very much like a young puppy; it likes people who feed it wood and coal and
      quickly develops an attachment to the people who own the place in which it lives. This makes
      it both an amusing oddity, once the fear and shock of having a living creature of flame in your
      kitchen has worn off, and a surprisingly useful guardian. Once the hearthfire elemental has
      established itself, those who would do harm to its home or family had best be prepared to burn.

      Hearthfire elementals eat flammable material, requiring no more to sustain them than a normal
      fire would. They can survive for up to three days with no new fuel but after that point, they will
      flee back to their home. Normal water cannot extinguish their flame.

      Combat Notes
      The hearthfire elemental is not normally aggressive. If it is directly attacked, or if its home or
      family is attacked, it will fight back. It cannot leave its hearth, so, it will normally use its ranged
      burn ability directly on opponents.

      Ranged Burn: Once per round, using a Combat Action, the hearthfire elemental can start a
      small fire anywhere it can see within 20 metres of itself. Living targets may make a Routine Evade
      test to avoid this. If the test fails, the target immediately catches on fire, taking 1D6 damage
      immediately to all locations and 1D6 damage each round until the fire is out. A hearthfire
      elemental can extinguish any fire it starts at will within six rounds of starting it; after that, it will
      burn out of control.

      Warmth: A hearthfire elemental can emit continual, pleasing, warmth. All within 10 metres of
      it are warmed and comforted by the heat.

      Light: At will, a hearthfire elemental can glow bright enough to illuminate a six metre radius
      circle.

      Flame On: There is a 20% chance that any melee attack the creature makes will set fire to
      an enemy. The fire causes 1D6 damage to the victim, per Combat Round until the flame is
      extinguished.




 80
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                      Dice        Average               1D20        Hit Location     AP/HP
         STR          2D6+1       8                     1-3         Right Leg          -/4
         CON          2D6+7       14                    4-6         Left Leg           -/4
         SIZ          1D6         4                     7-9         Abdomen            -/5
         INT          2D6+3       13                    10-12       Chest              -/6
         POW          2D6+2       12                    13-15       Right Arm          -/3
         DEX          2D6+9       16                    16-18       Left Arm           -/3
         CHA          3D6+1       12                    19-20       Head               -/4




         Combat Actions           2                     Armour: None.
         Damage Modifier          -1D4
         Magic Points             12                    Traits: Magic Sense.
         Movement                 8m
         Strike Rank              +10                   Common Skills: Athletics 60%, Evade 59%,
                                                        Insight 40%, Perception 50%, Persistence
                                                        40%, Resilience 40%, Stealth 47%, Unarmed
                                                        55%

        Combat Styles
        Tiny Burn (Unarmed) 60%

        Weapons
        Type	            Range	        Size	   Reach	         Damage	                 AP/HP
        Tiny Fists	      --	           T	      T	             1D3+1D6 (Fire)-1D4	     As for Arm




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                    81
      Jubear
      This creature looks like a brown bear, but its fur is matted with oozing green slime and fungoid
      growths. The whole of its chest seems to be covered with vile whitish growths and pustules.


      Jubears are a strain of bear that has entered into a symbiotic relationship with a living slime. The
      ooze does not consume the bear’s tissues, but instead feeds off the contents of the bear’s stomach;
      the ooze allows the bear to digest almost anything and heal quickly. A jubear does not need to eat
      its prey with its mouth as its chest cavity and abdomen is soft and yielding, and it can just push
      its food into the mass of fungal jelly that makes up almost half its body mass.

      The first jubears were sighted in the colder forests where brown bears are common but the ooze
      needs warmth and rain to flourish and fester, so of late more and more of the monsters have
      been migrating to more temperate climes. They can only be effectively killed by fire or disease
      and, fortunately, the symbiosis is relatively fragile so the creatures are vulnerable to sickness and
      infirmity. They have no natural predators so country folk must hunt the beasts down and burn
      the foulness out of them lest the jubears wipe the countryside clean of all life.

      Combat Notes
      A jubear tries to grab its enemies and hold them against its corpulent white stomach, so it can
      devour them through the ooze. It is instinctively terrified of fire and avoids it at all costs. By
      spending a Combat Action it can try and establish a grapple as per page 138 of the Legend Core
      Rulebook. A Critical Hit allows the creature to automatically establish a grapple.

      Digestive Ooze: If a jubear pins an opponent, that opponent takes 1D6 points of acidic damage
      across all locations. If the opponent is pinned for three successive rounds, a successful Difficult
      Brawn test allows them to break free, he is swallowed whole by the bear. A swallowed opponent
      can escape by doing 20 points of damage to the inside of the bear, but takes 2D6 points of acid
      damage each round to each location until he escapes.




 82
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                     Dice          Average            1D20       Hit Location       AP/HP
          STR        3D6+16        27                 1-3        Right Leg             4/10
          CON        3D6+11        22                 4-6        Left Leg              4/10
          SIZ        3D6+15        26                 7-9        Abdomen               4/11
          INT        5             5                  10-12      Chest                 4/12
          POW        3D6           11                 13-15      Right Arm             4/9
          DEX        3D6           11                 16-18      Left Arm              4/9
                                                      19-20      Head                  4/10




          Combat Actions           2                  Armour: Fur, ooze. No Armour Penalty.
          Damage Modifier          +1D12
          Magic Points             11                 Traits: Formidable Natural Weapons
          Movement                 24m
          Strike Rank              +8                 Common Skills: Athletics 69%, Perception
                                                      60%, Persistence 52%, Resilience 53%,
                                                      Stealth 23%, Swim 58%
                                                      Advanced Skills: Survival 79%, Track 40%

        Combat Styles
        Oozing Wounds (Bite, Claw) 72%

        Weapons
        Type	        Range	       Size	      Reach	           Damage	             AP/HP
        Bite	        --	          S	         T	               1D8+1D12	           As for Head
        Claw	        --	          M	         S	               1D6+1D12	           As for Arm




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                 83
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Knocker
        This creature looks rather like a gnome with slate-grey skin. His hair and beard are faintly metallic,
        perhaps copper, greying to iron at the edges.


        Knockers are a minor race, often mistaken for dwarves, gnomes or smaller races by those who
        do not know them – and few know the knockers, for they are among the most secretive of folk.
        They dwell in the lowest reaches of the underground, only occasionally coming to the surface.
        The underground is a place of terrible horrors and fearsome monsters, so the little knockers are
        forced to hide and avoid other creatures. They favour sealed caverns with no ingresses, which
        they can access using their Earth Walk ability.

        Knocker tribes consist of a few dozen members, who practise the high art of the knockers –
        mining. Unlike other species, they do not treasure the wealth of gold or silver or other resources
        of the earth; they appreciate them solely for their beauty. Knockers dig up gemstones, carve
        them, polish them, admire them, and then bury them again for future generations to find. The
        knockers dislike the mining practises of dwarves and men, but only take action against the largest
        mines that delve too close to knocker villages.

        Each village is ruled by a headman, who is generally also a priest of the knocker deity, the World
        Stone.

        Combat Notes
        Knockers have strong little stony fists and can make a surprisingly good account of themselves
        in a fistfight. When forced to defend themselves, they also use wickedly sharp little short swords
        and wear finely made chainmail.

        Earth Walk: For POW/4 (rounded down) times per day, a knocker can Earth Walk for one
        minute. While earth walking, the knocker can pass through earth and stone freely, moving at its
        normal movement through the obstacle. The knocker must keep moving and cannot stop within
        the stone, but can move in circles or spend multiple rounds immersed in stone.

        Tapping: All knockers know the secret language of the knockers, which they can use to
        communicate over long distances underground. This code is tapped onto the stone; the knocker
        must make a Routine Craft (stone working) test. Each five miles adds -5% to the difficulty of the
        test. So, a knocker wanting to communicate with another over 10 miles away must make their
        test at a -10% difficulty.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                 85
                  Dice            Average        1D20        Hit Location          AP/HP
       STR        4D6+1           13             1-3         Right Leg              5/5
       CON        2D6+8           15             4-6         Left Leg               5/5
       SIZ        1D6+6           10             7-9         Abdomen                5/6
       INT        3D6             11             10-12       Chest                  5/7
       POW        3D6             11             13-15       Right Arm              5/4
       DEX        2D6+1           8              16-18       Left Arm               5/4
       CHA      2D6+1             8              19-20       Head                   5/5




       Combat Actions             2              Armour: Chainmail. -7 Armour Penalty.
       Damage Modifier            +0
       Magic Points               11             Traits: Earth Sense, Dark Sight
       Movement                   6m
       Strike Rank                +10 (+3        Common Skills: Athletics 47%, Brawn 60%,
                                  when           Craft (stone working) 75%, Engineering
                                  armoured)      40%, Evade 44%, Evaluate 67%, Lore
                                                 (Mineral) 87%, Mechanisms 49%,
                                                 Persistence 50%, Resilience 70%

      Combat Styles
      Sword of the Stone (Short Sword, Unarmed) 69%

      Weaponsâ†œ
      Type	              Range	        Size	   Reach	           Damage	            AP/HP
      Short Sword	       --	           M	      S	               1D6	               6/8
      Unarmed	           --	           S	      T	               1D3	               As for Arm




 86
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Lightning Elemental
      This creature looks like a jagged sketch of a humanoid, drawn in yellow-blue lightning.


      Lightning elementals dwell where air and fire intersect, where the infinite crackling energies of
      flame meet rarefied vapours of air. Thunderheads the size of stars spit out lightning bolts that
      could light up a galaxy. In this infinitely tumultuous region, the lightning elementals reside.
      Sometimes, they slip into the mortal world to dance in the clouds or atop the masts of ships.
      They are also comparatively easy to summon and are a popular power source for wizards involved
      in electrical experimentation.

      In temperament, they are inquisitive and childlike, quick to take offence and quick to forget.
      They love toys of metal and wire, but soon break or melt such things in their charged play. They
      see pain and terror as a game; an adventurer who flees an attacking lightning elemental will be
      chased by a laughing horde of the creatures, but one who stands his ground and does not indulge
      them when they zap him will soon be ignored.

      Larger and older lighting elementals can be considerably more intelligent and informed, but
      retain the playful glee of their lesser kin.

      Combat Notes
      Lightning elementals dance in combat, slipping around enemies to blast them from behind.
      They use their agility and lightning transfer abilities to skip out of danger when injured.

      Lightning Touch: The touch of a lightning elemental deals 1D4 points of electrical damage to
      the affected location. The elemental cannot suppress this ability.

      Static Shock: Anyone within 10 metres of a lightning elemental risks taking damage from its
      crackling energies. A creature wearing any metal armour takes one point of electrical damage each
      round; a creature with metal armour on every location takes two points per round. Wielding a
      metal weapon increases the damage by one point per round.

      Lightning Transfer: For POW/4 times per day, a lightning elemental can transform itself into a
      bolt of lightning as a Combat Action and fly up to 40 metres in any direction. Anyone along the
      elemental’s path takes 3D6 points of damage to a random location. A successful Routine Evade
      test allows the victim to halve the damage from the searing lightning attack.

      Absorb Electricity: A lightning elemental takes no damage from an electrical attack; instead,
      half the damage is converted into healing. It cannot use its own attacks to heal itself in this
      fashion, but one lightning elemental can heal another. A lightning elemental healed this way
      gains healing only in the location struck by the attack.




 88
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                    Dice          Average                   1D20        Hit Location          AP/HP
         STR        2D6+1         8                         1-3         Right Leg              -/5
         CON        4D6           14                        4-6         Left Leg               -/5
         SIZ        2D6+3         10                        7-9         Abdomen                -/6
         INT        2D6+3         10                        10-12       Chest                  -/7
         POW        2D6+4         11                        13-15       Right Arm              -/4
         DEX      2D6+10          17                        16-18       Left Arm               -/4
         CHA      3D6             11                        19-20       Head                   -/5




         Combat Actions           3                         Armour: None
         Damage Modifier          -1D2
         Magic Points             10                        Traits: Life Sense, Magic Sense
         Movement                 8m        (fly
                                  15m)
         Strike Rank              +14                       Common Skills: Athletics 47%, Evade 77%,
                                                            Perception 50%, Persistence 49%, Resilience
                                                            69%, Stealth 57%, Unarmed 66%

        Combat Styles
        Lightning Conductor (Claw) 63%

        Weapons
        Type	     Range	      Size	                Reach	         Damage	                 AP/HP
        Claw	     --	         S	                   M	             1D4-1D2	                As for Arm




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                          89
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Living Ghoul
        The creature is so thin as to be just skin stretched over bone, but something about it says there is
        hidden might in those stringy muscles. Hairless, pale and huge-eyed, its mouth cracks open to reveal
        twisted, sharp teeth, and its hands end in rending claws. Boils and scabs mark its pallid grey skin,
        and it holds in its hand a well-gnawed human femur, which it tosses aside as it scents fresher meat.


        Living ghouls are not undead, though they are so degenerate they might as well be. They are
        a common phenomenon in large, long-established cities. They are the degenerate remnants of
        humans who fled underground, due to poverty, fear of the law, membership in banned and
        forbidden cults or some similar cause. They haunt the catacombs under the city, feasting on the
        newly dead and on living beings foolish enough to enter their realm. At times, driven by hunger
        or simple sadism, they will venture out of the sewers and tunnels on moonless nights, in order
        to take whatever prey they can.

        They have a simplistic society based on family bonds and raw power, mixed with twisted and
        half-forgotten remnants of their ancestral culture. The lair of a living ghoul is a clutter of strange
        junk – half-eaten bones, a broken child’s toy, six copper coins arranged in a pattern. They can
        speak a common tongue, as well as the language of the upper city, but tend towards insanity and
        their speech is likely to be babbling and meaningless.

        Combat Notes
        Living ghouls are both vicious and cowardly. They will only attack a target alone if they are very
        hungry or the target appears weak. They prefer to gang up on a target, striking from the shadows.
        They do not use weapons, but tear viciously at the victim. They quickly flee if the fight begins to
        go against them, using their knowledge of the under-cities to escape pursuit.

        Disease: A living ghoul’s body is a tumultuous cauldron of foul pestilence and disease; they can
        inflict this disease with their claw attacks and bite.

        Corpse Rupture
        The Corpse Rupture disease must be contracted through broken skin or open wounds/sores.
        The disease is not apparent at first and takes 1D4 hours before the first effects manifest. It begins
        with a sense of confusion, where the victim appears to be dazed and confused for 24 hours before
        agony shoots through his body, followed swiftly by mania and finally bleeding where the internal
        organs of the body begin to rupture.

        Application: Contact
        Onset Time: 1D4 hours
        Duration: 1D6 days
        Resistance Time: One Resistance roll
        Potency: 90
        Resistance: Resilience
        Conditions: Confusion, Agony, Mania (paranoid gibbering), Bleeding (1 point internally all
        locations per hour). The disease stops short of actual death in this regard, but the victim is then
        driven by an insatiable hunger for the living flesh, warm blood and cracked bone of others.
        Antidote/Cure: The disease is magical and can only be cured by a Cure Disease spell.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                 91
                  Dice       Average            1D20        Hit Location        AP/HP
       STR        4D6+4      18                 1-3         Right Leg             -/6
       CON        3D6+1      12                 4-6         Left Leg              -/6
       SIZ        2D6+8      15                 7-9         Abdomen               -/7
       INT        8          8                  10-12       Chest                 -/8
       POW        3D6+1      12                 13-15       Right Arm             -/5
       DEX        2D6+3      10                 16-18       Left Arm              -/5
       CHA      4            4                  19-20       Head                  -/6




       Combat Actions        2                  Armour: None.
       Damage Modifier       +1D4
       Magic Points          12                 Traits: Dark Sight, Diseased
       Movement              8m
       Strike Rank           +9                 Common Skills: Athletics 60%, Evade 55%,
                                                Perception 49%, Persistence 50%, Resilience
                                                66%, Stealth 60%, Unarmed 70%

      Combat Styles
      Hungryyyy (Bite, Claw) 70%

      Weapons
      Type	     Range	       Size	     Reach	         Damage	            AP/HP
      Bite	     --	          S	        T	             1D6+1D4	           As for Head
      Claw	     --	          S	        M	             1D4+1D4	           As for Arm




 92
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Mesmeric Spectre
      This looks like an ordinary human, but your keen eye for detail notices that first, parts of him are
      transparent and second, his eyes burn as though were windows onto an inferno.


      Mesmeric spectres are said to be spawned when a soul condemned to eternal torment bargains
      with its jailors, arguing that if it were sent back for just a short time, it could gather even more
      souls into the flames; a sort of diabolical plea bargain or work release program. Others believe
      that mesmerics are the spirits of those who had great potential in life, but squandered it; the
      ghosts of those who might have been master wizards and famous adventurers, but instead spent
      their days in alehouses or indolence. They can be extremely charismatic as far as spectres go,
      which they use to their advantage when dealing with mortals they wish to trick and trap.

      A mesmeric is of little threat physically. Its touch causes alarming bruises and welts to manifest
      on the victim’s skin, marks resembling those caused by strangulation, but the damage is limited
      to the surface and it is difficult for the mesmeric spectre to kill using force alone. The creatures
      prefer to sow dissent and foul whispers to induce the victims into killing each other. The ideal
      environment for a mesmeric spectre is an isolated but crowded place, such as a ship at sea, an inn
      in a storm, an isolated castle or military outpost, or a group of adventurers deep in a dungeon.
      The incorporeal spectre eavesdrops on their arguments and petty squabbles, and then uses its
      mesmeric abilities to divide them and seed hatred among them.

      Combat Notes
      Mesmeric spectres know they cannot hope to defeat a foe using their weak physical attacks alone,
      so they only fight in melee when trapped and trying to escape. They must prefer to use their
      spell-like abilities to confuse and divide their foes. All the spectre’s spells are cast at Magnitude 3.

      Domination: The mesmeric spectre can use the Dominate (any humanoid) spell up to POW/4
      (rounded down) times a day, as detailed on page 198 of the Legend Core Rulebook.

      Phantom (All): The mesmeric spectre can use the Phantom (all) spell up to POW/4 (rounded
      down) times a day. See page 202 of the Legend Core Rulebook.

      Telepathy: As per the spell on page 208 of the Legend Core Rulebook, the mesmeric spectre can
      use this power to read the attitude of a target as well as communicate with it. They often use this
      to sow the seeds of mistrust and dissent amongst the weaker members of a group. It can be done
      as many times as the spectre desires.

      Incorporeal: The mesmeric spectre only takes damage from magic, and weapons which have
      been augmented or enchanted.




 94
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                    Dice          Average             1D20          Hit Location         AP/HP
         STR        2D6+3         10                  1-3           Right Leg             -/5
         CON        2D6+3         10                  4-6           Left Leg              -/5
         SIZ        2D6+6         13                  7-9           Abdomen               -/6
         INT        3D6+7         18                  10-12         Chest                 -/7
         POW        2D6+5         12                  13-15         Right Arm             -/4
         DEX        3D6+6         17                  16-18         Left Arm              -/4
                                                      19-20         Head                  -/5




         Combat Actions           3                   Armour: None.
         Damage Modifier          +0
         Magic Points             12                  Traits: Life Sense, Magic Sense.
         Movement                 2 0 m
                                  (flying)
         Strike Rank              +18                 Common Skills: Athletics 67%, Evade 70%,
                                                      Perception 77%, Persistence 80%, Resilience
                                                      68%, Stealth 90%, Unarmed 40%
                                                      Magic Skills: Sorcery 95%, Manipulation 80%

        Combat Styles
        Spectral Touch (Spectral Bruising ) 50%

        Weapons
        Type	     Range	          Size	      Reach	         Damage	                AP/HP
        Claw	     --	             S	         M	             1D2 (non-lethal)	      As for Arm




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                    95
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Mirror Ghost
        It is a young woman, beautiful and sad, who stares forlornly across the moonlit lagoon. As she stands
        and turns, her form shifts, with bloody gashes marring her face and body, and glinting shards of glass
        erupting from beneath her skin.


        A mirror ghost is a creature both sad and terrifying. It is created under fairly rare circumstances,
        when a distraught individual is driven to suicide while facing a mirror and whose final actions
        crack or damage the mirror in some way. Occasionally when this combination of events occurs
        does the spirit of the deceased passes into the shards of the mirror, thus creating a mirror ghost.

        A mirror ghost usually resembles the individual whose spirit created it, wearing the clothing they
        wore at the time of death and with no sign of the cause of death. However, it shifts its form when
        preparing to attack. It assumes a much more horrific visage, altering its body so it appears to
        be half-human and half glass, with strips of reflective glass intertwined with the creature’s pallid
        skin. The ghostly flesh attaches to the glass only poorly, so gaps appear where muscle, bone and
        blood can be seen. Furthermore, the method of suicide becomes apparent and often exaggerated;
        someone who died by poison will appear hideously bloated and discoloured, someone who died
        by slitting their wrists will be sodden with blood and so on.

        Mirror ghosts have one overwhelming motivation – revenge. They seek vengeance on whatever
        individuals or individuals drove them to suicide and cannot rest until this vengeance in achieved.
        While the mirror ghost is powerful enough to kill many beings directly, it prefers to use its abilities
        to drive its victims to kill themselves, as they forced it too. If the mirror ghost accomplishes this
        quickly, the ghost will dissolve and the spirit will pass on. The longer it takes though, the more
        warped and evil the ghost will become. Very often, the mirror ghost finds it cannot be sated even
        with killing those responsible and extends its actions to relatives, friends and so on, each new
        killing feeding an undead frenzy for more.

        A mirror ghost denied vengeance will simply continue to exist, growing progressively more
        bitter and hateful. Over time, the mirror ghost begins to blame all living things and becomes a
        carnivore of joy, seeking out those who love their life, and driving them to despair and suicide.

        A mirror ghost may only be killed permanently by destroying the remnants of the mirror it was
        born from.

        Combat Notes
        The mirror ghost will avoid direct combat unless it is required. It prefers to entice others to
        kill themselves. If forced into conflict, it will rely primarily on its Shardspray ability to destroy
        its foes, and it will always be looking for a way to flee so that it can continue on its mission of
        vengeance. If it cannot use Shardspray, it will manifest razor sharp glass-shard claws and use those
        to inflict horrible wounds.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                  97
      Mirrorform: The mirror ghost may enter a mirror and assume the shape of whoever is looking
      into the mirror. This is almost always the current target of the mirror ghost. In this way, the
      mirror ghost appears to be the person’s soul or conscience u and will berate the person about their
      faults, sins, shortcomings and so on, attempting to drive them into a suicidal frenzy. The mirror
      ghost will generally not manifest in this way when there is anyone else in the room, perhaps
      adding to the madness-causing effect. If the mirror is smashed while the mirror ghost is within
      it, it will manifest immediately.

      Mirrordwell: A mirror ghost can inhabit a mirror invisibly and will go wherever the mirror goes.
      It usually does this so it can follow a victim wherever they flee, provided they take a mirror with
      them. If the mirror is smashed while the mirror ghost is within it, it will manifest immediately.

      Phantom: A mirror ghost can cast all the Phantom (sense) spells and augment them like a
      Sorcerer. See page 202 of the Legend Core Rulebook.

      Shardspray: A mirror ghost can cause an explosion of mirror-glass shards in an eight metre
      radius around itself; it can do this for POW/4 (rounded down) times a day. The shards cause
      2D6 points of damage to four random locations and a successful Difficult Evade test can mitigate
      this to half.

      Unkillable: While the mirror ghost can be seemingly killed, it will reform 1D4 days later unless
      the original mirror it was born from is found and destroyed.

      Change State: The mirror ghost can transform from its corporeal form to its incorporeal quickly,
      whilst in the latter it can be only harmed by magic, magic weapons and other magical attacks/
      enchantments. The former can take damage from any source. It takes a Combat Action for the
      mirror ghost to do this and it can affect the physical world normally in this state.




 98
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                       Dice         Average            1D20        Hit Location           AP/HP
         STR           2D6+6        13                 1-3         Right Leg                 3/6
         CON           2D6+6        13                 4-6         Left Leg                  3/6
         SIZ           2D6+6        13                 7-9         Abdomen                   3/7
         INT           2D6+7        14                 10-12       Chest                     3/8
         POW           2D6+7        14                 13-15       Right Arm                 3/5
         DEX           3D6+5        16                 16-18       Left Arm                  3/5
                                                       19-20       Head                      3/6




         Combat Actions             3                  Armour: 3 point mirror shard, supernaturally
                                                       strong. No Armour Penalty.
         Damage Modifier            +1D2
         Magic Points               14                 Traits: Life Sense, Magic Sense.
         Movement                   8m
         Strike Rank                +15                Common Skills: Athletics 70%, Evade 77%,
                                                       Influence 80%, Insight 60%, Perception
                                                       88%, Persistence 70%, Resilience 60%,
                                                       Sleight 70%, Stealth 80%, Unarmed 70%
                                                       Advanced Skills: Survival 80%, Track 90%
                                                       Magic Skills: Manipulation 90%, Sorcery
                                                       95%

        Combat Styles
        Snow White Queen (Claw) 90%

        Weapons
        Type	       Range	        Size	       Reach	         Damage	                      AP/HP
        Claw	       --	           S	          M	             1D6+1D2 Bleeding	            As for Arm




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                       99
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Mirthless
        This creature is an unnaturally tall figure, robed in a burial shroud with a terrifyingly wide grin
        stretched across its fleshless skull. Oversized clawed hands protrude from the end of its black-sleeved
        skeletal arms.


        Mirthless are a terrible form of remorseless undead, called upon as assassins or hunters of grave-
        robbers. They are utterly unyielding and utterly tireless. When the mirthless are sent after a
        victim, almost nothing can stop their inexorable advance.

        Many necromancers have experimented in creating more mirthless; they stretch dead men on
        the wrack or pump poisoned growth potions into dying flesh, or send dark summons into the
        netherworld of wraiths and spectres. There come no answers, and no mortuary transformations.
        All the mirthless in the world dwell in one obscure temple, from which they can be called
        with the right offer and the right ritual. Calling a mirthless requires a successful Difficult Lore
        (mirthless) test to perform the ceremony. When the horror arrives, it must be bargained with in
        the secret tongue of the mirthless, a secret known only to a select few. The mirthless will only
        accept missions that conform to their ancient laws and which offer suitable recompense in pain
        or magic.

        Combat Notes
        The mirthless are almost impossible to stop. They can shift between material and incorporeal
        forms at will, walking through walls or barriers before materialising to slash with their stone
        claws.

        Stony Claws: The mirthless are armed with invulnerable stone claws of prodigious strength and
        weight. Anyone slashed with these mighty claws must make either a Hard Acrobatics or Hard
        Brawn test to avoid being knocked over by the power of the mirthless blow.

        Chilling Aura: The area around a mirthless is unnaturally cold. Anyone within 10 metres of the
        undead must make an immediate Difficult Resilience test or suffer 1D4 points of cold damage
        per location per round, until out of the area. The mirthless affects victims regardless of its form.

        Dematerialise: A mirthless may become incorporeal at will at any point during its movement.
        It can also become material at will. It may only shift from one state to another once each round.
        While incorporeal, the mirthless can only be struck by enchanted weapons or spells, but cannot
        attacks with its stony claws.

        Incredible Healing: Mirthless that escape combat and retreat to a safe place heal fully overnight.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                  101
                  Dice           Average         1D20       Hit Location      AP/HP
       STR        4D6+8          22              1-3        Right Leg           -/8
       CON        2D6+11         18              4-6        Left Leg            -/8
       SIZ        2D6+13         20              7-9        Abdomen             -/9
       INT        3D6+1          12              10-12      Chest               -/10
       POW        4D6            14              13-15      Right Arm           -/7
       DEX      4D6              14              16-18      Left Arm            -/7
                                                 19-20      Head                -/8




       Combat Actions            3               Armour: None.
       Damage Modifier           +1D8
       Magic Points              14              Traits: Dark Sight, , Formidable Natural
                                                 Weapons, Life Sense, Magic Sense
       Movement                  12m
       Strike Rank               +13             Common Skills: Athletics 61%, Evade 75%,
                                                 Insight 80%, Perception 93%, Persistence
                                                 75%, Resilience 60%, Stealth 80%, Unarmed
                                                 70%
                                                 Advanced Skills: Track 97%


      Combat Styles
      Heavy strike (Claws) 83%

      Weapons
      Type	          Range	           Size	   Reach	        Damage	           AP/HP
      Claw	          --	              M	      M	            1D6+1D4	          As for Arm




102
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Nightrender
        The little you can see of this creature suggests it is something like a cross between a humanoid form,
        a monkey, and a cat. It moves with unnatural dexterity from shadow to shadow. So wrapped is it in
        darkness that you cannot make out features with any clarity, but light glints off oversized claws in an
        unsettling fashion.


        Nightrender packs are a danger to travellers and farmers in outlying regions. These monsters are
        a curious mix of traits and magic, leading many to suppose some evil wizard produced them in
        a magical crossbreeding experiment. More progressive sages speak of chaotic storms and horrors
        spawned by magic gone wild and sour. The nightrenders know and care nothing for their origin,
        or for anything except the glee of hunting and killing. Animals do not take such pleasure in
        death, while truly intelligent beings cannot act with the same brutal, savage grace.

        The creatures are primarily nocturnal, hunting at night. Unlike other animals, they have no fear
        of the walls and houses of civilisation and are quite willing to break down doors or slip down
        chimneys to get to their prey. They rarely risk open assault on a well-defended cottage or village,
        but often steal babies from unattended cribs or prey on the sick, elderly or sleeping.

        Nightrenders are nomadic predators, wandering across the land in search of easy prey. They make
        their lairs in caves and caverns as well as large animal dwellings, driving the existing denizens out
        if they can. They have a strange link to the phases of the moon; nightrenders have never been
        seen abroad during the three nights of the full moon, but always make attacks in the dark of the
        new moon.

        Combat Notes
        Nightrenders use their Shadowslip ability to swiftly close with enemies, avoiding missile fire and
        spells. They keep a spare Shadowslip to help them flee combats where they are overmatched. The
        creatures have excellent pack tactics and always try to flank their targets.

        Rend: On a critical hit the nightrender tears flesh from its opponent’s body, causing an extra
        1D4 damage and Bleeding.

        Shadowslip: POW/4 (rounded up) times per day, a nightrender may use an effect similar to
        Teleport on page 208 of the Legend Core Rulebook to travel from any area of darkness or shadowy
        illumination to any other area of darkness or shadowy illumination within 15 metres. This
        requires a Combat Action and can leave the creature vulnerable to retaliatory strikes.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                  103
                  Dice         Average           1D20        Hit Location          AP/HP
       STR        2D6+8        15                1-3         Right Leg              -/5
       CON        2D6+5        12                4-6         Left Leg               -/5
       SIZ        2D6+6        13                7-9         Abdomen                -/6
       INT        8            8                 10-12       Chest                  -/7
       POW        2D6+7        14                13-15       Right Arm              -/4
       DEX        2D6+9        16                16-18       Left Arm               -/4
       CHA        8            8                 19-20       Head                   -/5




       Combat Actions          3                 Armour: None
       Damage Modifier         +1D2
       Magic Points            14                Traits: Dark Sense, Dark Sight.
       Movement                9m
       Strike Rank             +12               Common Skills: Athletics 80%, Evade 72%,
                                                 Perception 83%, Persistence 55%, Resilience
                                                 74%, Stealth 87%, Unarmed 65%
                                                 Advanced Skills: Track 88%


      Combat Styles
      Night’s Edge (Claws) 82%

      Weapons
      Type	           Range	         Size	   Reach	        Damage	                  AP/HP
      Claw	           --	            S	      M	            1D4+1D2 Bleeding	        As for Arm




104
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Oakstump
        The little man…is not so little. Though only the height of a halfling, he is very broad. The muscles
        flexing under his chestnut-brown skin look like smooth rocks moving beneath thick leather. The
        battle-axe he carries is slightly larger than he is, but he wields it without apparent difficulty.


        Oakstumps are unusual fey. They do not have wings, no remarkable abilities and are loud,
        boisterous and gregarious. They dwell in old forests, especially those with truly large trees such
        as oaks and redwoods, and while they guard their lands from despoilers, they are often willing to
        deal with humans who respect their terms and territory. They tend to actually Â�like lumberjacks,
        who share with them a general appreciation for the simpler pleasures of life, and the arrival of a
        squabble of oakstumps in a logging camp usually means a night of drunken revelling rather than
        an attack on invaders. This only goes so far – the oakstumps allow careful harvesting of their
        forests but not desecration, and can turn from boisterous friends to deadly foes very quickly if
        their limits are violated.

        Although most fey shy away from physical conflict, the oakstumps live for it. Among themselves,
        they are perpetual brawlers, settling even the smallest dispute with a rough-and-tumble wrestling
        match. Since they tend to be a cantankerous and argumentative lot, this means any gathering of
        oakstumps will quickly turn into a free-for-all.

        Oakstumps do not play the complex political games of other fey. If a decision has to be made by
        a group, it will usually be resolved by some contest of strength; arm wrestling is common, but
        so are rock-tossing, weight-lifting and similar feats. Drinking contests are also a commonly used
        means of reaching a consensus, though this can take a long time, given the oakstumps tolerance
        for alcohol.

        They do possess some of the typical fey love of trickery if dealing with individuals of larger races,
        especially humans, who are unaware of their nature. They will often trick them into wagering on
        feats of strength. Not a few naïve visitors to the deep woods have left bereft of all but an under
        tunic due to such bets.

        Combat Notes
        Oakstumps are brawlers, period. Their entire tactical repertoire is generally ‘let’s get ‘em, boys!’
        followed by a charge. Oakstumps are rarely unarmed and they prefer human-size weapons to
        those scaled to their own bodies, since their magical strength enables them to wield them easily.
        It takes a lot for an oakstump to admit he is outclassed, so retreats are rare. The general oakstump
        answer to anything which cannot be solved by brute force is to try more brute force, gathering
        as many of their kind as they can. Few things can stand against a sufficiently large force of them.

        Alcohol Tolerance: Oakstumps love to drink, which is good, as they need to consume a lot of
        alcohol to get drunk. They gain a bonus of +40% to any Resilience tests involving alcohol or
        getting drunk.

        Big for Their Size: The oakstump’s strength is partially magical and they have a greater than
        normal strength for their size. This enables them to wield weapons of humans, as well as do a
        greater amount of damage in combat – if they enter an area where magic is denied, their STR
        and SIZ is halved.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                105
                  Dice            Average              1D20        Hit Location          AP/HP
       STR        4D6+8           22                   1-3         Right Leg                4/7
       CON        4D6             14                   4-6         Left Leg                 4/7
       SIZ        1D6+3           7                    7-9         Abdomen                  4/8
       INT        2D6+3           10                   10-12       Chest                    4/9
       POW        2D6+2           9                    13-15       Right Arm                4/6
       DEX       2D6+3            10                   16-18       Left Arm                 4/6
       CHA      2D6+1             8                    19-20       Head                     4/7




       Combat Actions             2                    Armour: 4 point natural rock. No Armour
                                                       Penalty.
       Damage Modifier            +1D6
       Magic Points               9                    Traits: Dark Sight, Earth Sense, Life Sense
       Movement                   6m
       Strike Rank                +10                  Common Skills: Athletics 49%, Brawn 80%,
                                                       Evade 78%, Insight 62%, Perception 70%,
                                                       Persistence 50%, Resilience 77%, Stealth
                                                       52%, Unarmed 70%

      Combat Styles
      Stitch That! (Punch, 2H Axe) 81%

      Weapons
      Type	              Range	       Size	   Reach	   Damage	                            AP/HP
      Fists	             --	          S	      S	       1D3 +1D6	                          As for Arm	
      Battleaxe 2H	      --	          M	      M	       1D8+1 +1D6 Bleed, Sunder	          4/8




106
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Parched Zombie
      This creature is a hideously wrinkled corpse slowly staggering over the dunes. With every movement,
      little puffs of dust or sand rise from its dry joints.


      Parched zombies arise from the remains of those who die of thirst in the desert. They wander
      in circles for days on end, searching desperately for water or a way out of the endlessly shifting
      sands. At some point in their hopeless peregrinations, between one dragging footfall and the
      next, the lost traveller dies and keeps going as a parched zombie.

      They follow tracks in the desert, slowly marching after other wanderers. Sometimes, whole gangs
      of parched zombies can be found following each other, all thirsting for precious moisture. The
      desert tribes know to stay clear of such regions and keep the zombies contained by dragging
      water sacks (or, in some cases, captured prisoners) across the zombies’ trail. The zombies follow
      the smell of water and so are tricked into staying in the hottest parts of the desert.

      The zombies make poor servants; attempts to bribe them with water generally fail, as the creatures
      are too dumb to comprehend the idea of exchanging labour for a reward. When a parched
      zombie makes it out of the desert, they soon pass into a final death, gorging themselves on
      moisture squeezed out of plants or animals. Whole troupes of parched zombies can sometimes
      be seen hurling themselves into wadis during flash floods.

      Combat Notes
      Parched zombies have the same restrictions as normal zombies and so can only take single
      actions. They are marginally more intelligent and have a certain animal cunning, so their normal
      tactic is to trail water-laden prey at a distance. The zombies are tireless, so they wait until the prey
      is exhausted or sleeping before stumbling in to drain moisture. They also use their Trackless Step
      ability to lead other creatures astray.

      Drain Moisture: Anyone struck by the zombie’s unarmed attack must make a Difficult Resilience
      test or suffer 1D6 points of CON damage. The CON loss returns at a rate of one point per hour
      of rest and the parched zombie is healed by the same number of points it has stolen. These are
      applied across its hit locations, so it can choose where to heal itself.

      Trackless Step: A parched zombie can choose not to leave a trail when walking over sand or
      other desert terrain and so cannot be tracked.




108
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                        Dice            Average          1D20        Hit Location            AP/HP
         STR            3D6+12          23               1-3         Right Leg                  -/4
         CON            1D6             4                4-6         Left Leg                   -/4
         SIZ            2D6+6           13               7-9         Abdomen                    -/5
         INT            5               5                10-12       Chest                      -/6
         POW            1D3             2                13-15       Right Arm                  -/3
         DEX            1D6+3           7                16-18       Left Arm                   -/3
                                                         19-20       Head                       -/4




         Combat Actions                 1                Armour: None
         Damage Modifier                +1D6
         Magic Points                   2                Traits: Dark Sight, Night Sight
         Movement                       5m
         Strike Rank                    +6               Common Skills: Athletics 40%, Evade 59%,
                                                         Perception 70%, Persistence 65%, Resilience
                                                         60%, Unarmed 67%

        Combat Styles
        Sand Batter (Unarmed) 67%

        Weapons
        Type	                  Range	        Size	   Reach	        Damage	                 AP/HP
        Unarmed	               --	           S	      T	            1D3+1D6	                As for Arms




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                         109
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Platinum Unicorn
        At a distance, it appears to be a fine warhorse clad in brilliant plate barding. As it draws closer,
        it becomes evident this is no horse, and that it does not wear armour. It is a unicorn of surpassing
        perfection, whose skin and horn are formed from living platinum. It glows with an aura of pure and
        perfect goodness, and all other creatures seem unworthy to gaze upon it. It speaks with a voice like a
        waterfall of crystal bells.


        The platinum unicorn is a creature from realms which embody the ideas of pure freedom and
        benevolence. It is not content to remain there, however, and often voyages to the mortal realm
        in order to defend the virtues it embodies. It is a stalwart defender, rarely bringing battle to a foe
        but standing firm guard to protect that which is good from all that threatens it.

        In form, it is perfection, and some have claimed that the mortal unicorns are merely imperfect
        and distorted shadows of the platinum unicorn. Others feel the reverse is true, that the platinum
        unicorn is what becomes of earthly unicorns after they perish. The platinum unicorns themselves
        do not speak of their origins.

        Rarely, a platinum unicorn will find a woodsman or musician whom they feel a special bond for,
        and will willingly act as their steed for a time. The chosen mortal need not be female or a virgin,
        but they must be pure of heart and devoted to the principles for which the platinum unicorn
        stands. Holy Knights, too rigid and formal to appeal to the wild soul of the platinum unicorn,
        can only look on and weep, and more than one has turned to darkness after their soul has been
        consumed with envy over another being so gifted.

        Platinum unicorns also serve as messengers from the other planes. They often bring tidings to
        mortal rulers, either a warning of encroaching evil, or to the ruler that their own crimes may
        soon come back upon them, but that it is not too late to change. Either sort of warning is very
        risky to ignore.

        Platinum unicorns speak a variety of languages, usually those of the elves and dwarves as well as
        other more obscure tongues. They do this flawlessly and can always speak and understand the
        language perfectly.

        The platinum unicorn can fly via magical means, without the need for wings. This ability fails if
        they enter an area which is magically dead.

        Combat Notes
        Platinum unicorns are fearless combatants. Since they will not fight without a good cause, there
        is little chance they will flee while they can still fight. If they can buy even a few seconds of time
        for those they are defending by fighting unto death, so be it. In battle, they rely heavily on their
        defensive abilities, especially their Holy Blaze, as it is unlikely they will confront an enemy not
        affected by it. Any tactic which can win the battle while costing the fewest lives will be preferred,
        as the platinum unicorn does not believe that some should fall so others may live. To it, all lives
        are equally valuable.

        Holy Blaze: The platinum unicorn can use this power for POW/2 (rounded up) times per day.
        It emits a brilliant burst of light which burns outwards from its body; any creature intent on
        causing the unicorn or its friends/allies harm in a radius of 12 metres takes 1D6 points of damage
        per location, is struck blind, dumb, and is confused (see page 79 of the Legend Core Rulebook)
        for 2D6 rounds.


Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                 111
      Holy Succour: The platinum unicorn emits a soft glow from its body at all times; this five metre
      radius effect acts to heal allies of the creature, by one point of damage on all locations per hour
      they remain within it. It also prevents mortally wounded allies and creatures from dying and
      causes spells directed to cause harm or danger to the platinum unicorn to fail 80% of the time.

      Summon Unicorns: For POW/2 (rounded up) times per day, as a Combat Action, the platinum
      unicorn can summon 1D4 unicorns (see page 85 of Monsters of Legend).

      Spell-like Abilities: Platinum unicorns can use the following divine magic spells – Cure Disease/
      Poison, Evergreen, Exorcism, Gleam, Heal Body, Heal Mind, Heal Wound, Regenerate Limb,
      Resurrect, Spirit Block, and Sunspear.



                     Dice          Average                1D20         Hit Location           AP/HP
       STR           3D6+12        23                     1-2          Right Hind Leg            6/8
       CON           3D6+8         18                     3-4          Left Hind Leg             6/8
       SIZ           2D6+13        20                     5-7          Hindquarters              6/9
       INT           3D6+5         16                     8-10         Forequarters              6/10
       POW           2D6+12        19                     11-13        Right Front Leg           6/7
       DEX           2D6+11        18                     14-16        Left Front Leg            6/7
       CHA           2D6+13        20                     17-20        Head                      6/8




       Combat Actions              3                      Armour: Platinum hide. No Armour
                                                          Penalty.
       Damage Modifier             +1D8
       Magic Points                19                     Traits: Formidable Natural Weapons, Dark
                                                          Sight, Night Sight, Life Sense, Magic Sense
       Movement                    14m
       Strike Rank                 +17                    Common Skills: Athletics 93%, Evade 90%,
                                                          Insight 90%, Perception 89%, Persistence
                                                          92%, Resilience 99%
                                                          Advanced Skills: Survival 90%, Track 95%
                                                          Divine Skills: Pact 95%, Lore (Holy Powers)
                                                          97%

      Combat Styles
      Holy Smite (Horn, Kick) 120%

      Weapons
      Type	           Range	        Size	       Reach	            Damage	                AP/HP
      Horn	           --	           L	          L	                1D8+1D8	               As for Head
      Kick	           --	           L	          M	                1D6+1D8	               As for Leg




112
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Plundering Dead
      This creature is a fast-moving skeleton, dressed in a garish piratical outfit. It swings a scimitar with
      panache and grins widely at you. Admittedly, without any skin to cover its face, it could hardly do
      otherwise. A shimmering, ghostly field surrounds it.


      Plundering dead are piratical undead, who remain tied to their bodies after death because of their
      lust for gold and treasure. They are also produced by certain terrible curses and ancient artefacts.
      Plundering dead organise themselves into crews of wild marauders who sail decaying hulks into
      ports to raid and murder. They behave much as they did in life, to the extent of drinking and
      whoring – it is the lusts of the plundering dead that keep them in this state of undeath, so they
      may deny their undead nature. Indeed, some are so caught up in their quest for gold they do
      not notice they died.

      Technically, the plundering dead are ghostly apparitions; they drag their bony carcasses along
      like animated puppets because they do not understand their incorporeal nature. Smashing a
      plundering dead’s skeletal body will not destroy them, but it does confuse them. The plundering
      dead who understand their true form become full-fledged spectres or ghosts. Few last that long,
      as they are too easily distracted by gold or driven back by salt water to be truly dangerous foes.

      Combat Notes
      The incorporeal spirit of the dead drags their skeletal body through the air as if it were almost
      weightless. Plundering dead dance like agile puppets, leaping from height to height and slashing
      with their scimitars.

      Cause Fear: Anyone who comes within 20 metres of a plundering dead must make a Difficult
      Persistence test or be gripped by a terrible fear. This fear effect causes them to flee the sight of
      the creature for 1D6 rounds. Anyone who succeeds in the test is immune to the fear for the next
      24 hours.

      Ghostly Apparition: Plundering dead are animated by a ghostly shape; this shape moves the
      bony body like a puppet. This dichotomy gives the plundering dead a +10% bonus to Acrobatics,
      Athletics, and Stealth tests. If the plundering dead are reduced to 0 HP in the chest or abdomen
      area then they are discorporated as the puppet body drops to pieces. It will rebuild a new body
      in 1D4 weeks – if a magical weapon strikes the apparition in the meantime, the plundering dead
      is utterly destroyed.

      Treasuresense: By concentrating for a few minutes, a plundering dead can detect the presence
      of any gold, silver, platinum, jewels or other expensive, shiny treasures within 20 metres. This
      ability can penetrate any amount of stone or other obstacles.

      Water Vulnerability: Plundering dead are terrified of salt water as they cannot swim and the salt
      disrupts their ghostly flesh. Salt water affects them as if it were powerful acid and inflicts 3D6
      damage to their ghostly form. Plundering dead reduced to 0 HP in the chest or abdomen by this
      immersion are immediately destroyed.




114
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                    Dice            Average         1D20        Hit Location         AP/HP
         STR        2D6+7           14              1-3         Right Leg             3/4
         CON        1D6             4               4-6         Left Leg              3/4
         SIZ        2D6+6           13              7-9         Abdomen               3/5
         INT        3D6             11              10-12       Chest                 3/6
         POW        3D6             11              13-15       Right Arm             3/3
         DEX        1D6+13          17              16-18       Left Arm              3/3
                                                    19-20       Head                  3/4




         Combat Actions             3               Armour: 3 point hard bone. No Armour
                                                    Penalty.
         Damage Modifier            +1D2
         Magic Points               11              Traits: Dark Sight, Life Sense
         Movement                   12m
         Strike Rank                +14             Common Skills: Athletics 77%, Dance 66%,
                                                    Evade 75%, Lore (Great Big Sea) 88%,
                                                    Perception 60%, Persistence 57%, Resilience
                                                    60%, Stealth 88%
                                                    Advanced Skills: Acrobatics 59%, Boating
                                                    60%, Shiphandling 90%

        Combat Styles
        Leapin’ Bones (Scimitar, Longbow) 79%

        Weapons
        Type	              Range	          Size	   Reach	         Damage	                   AP/HP
        Scimitar	          --	             M	      M	             1D8+1D2 Bleed	            6/10	
        Longbow	           175m	           H	      -	             1D8+1D2 Impale	           4/7




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                    115
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Ragged Wraith
        A spectral figure dressed in a ragged burial shroud flits out of the ground, wreathed in tatters of mist.


        Ragged wraiths are the spirits of those whose bodies were desecrated or dismembered after death.
        They manifest as tattered shadows of their former selves, dressed in the ragged remains of their
        burial garb. They are bitter, hateful entities, hungry for both revenge and the life force of the
        living. They usually haunt the tombs where they were buried, but hunger can drive them abroad
        into the land. Like all wraiths, they must hide from the bright rays of the sun, and are adept at
        finding hiding places in nooks and crannies, and cracks in the ground.

        Combat Notes
        In combat, ragged wraiths use their incorporeal forms to the fullest. They use their Life Sense
        trait to find prey and then hide in the ground or the stone of a corridor wall. When an enemy
        passes, the wraith slashes at him with its tendrils. The main body of the wraith stays hidden,
        giving it cover from enemy attacks. They may only be harmed by magic or magic weapons.

        Unnatural Aura: Animals, whether wild or domesticated, can sense the unnatural presence of a
        wraith at a distance of 15 metres. They will not willingly approach closer and panic if forced to
        do so; they remain panicked as long as they are within range.

        Powerlessness: Wraiths are utterly powerless in natural sunlight, and flee from it. It causes them
        to lose their incorporeal state and they can be harmed by normal means.

        Death’s Hand: The wraith can use Hand of Death as per the spell on page 166 of the Legend
        Core Rulebook, POW/2 (rounded up) times per day. A victim slain like this allows the wraith to
        immediately re-grow a missing tendril.

        Spawn: Any humanoid slain by a ragged wraith becomes a wraith in 1D4 rounds. Its body
        remains intact and inanimate but its spirit is torn free from its corpse and transformed. Spawn
        are under the command of the wraith that created them and remain enslaved until its death.
        They do not possess any of the abilities they had in life.

        Tendrils: A ragged wraith has four tendrils of ectoplasm hanging from its tattered body. It
        attacks by whirling these tendrils out at enemies while the wraith itself stays hidden within
        the ground or wall. This means the wraith has cover from most attacks. The tendrils can be
        attacked individually, if enemies pre-empt this to slash at them as they emerge. The tendrils are
        incorporeal and require magic or magic weapons to damage. A wraith can re-grow one tendril
        every 24 hours.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                    117
                     Dice         Average             1D20      Hit Location             AP/HP
       STR           2D6+13       20                  1-3       Upper Right Tendril         -/5
       CON           1D6+6        10                  4-6       Upper Left Tendril          -/5
       SIZ           2D6+7        14                  7-9       Abdomen                     -/6
       INT           3D6+5        16                  10-12     Chest                       -/7
       POW           3D6+5        16                  13-15     Lower Right Tendril         -/4
       DEX           4D6+6        20                  16-18     Lower Left Tendril          -/4
                                                      19-20     Head                        -/5




       Combat Actions             3                   Armour: None
       Damage Modifier            +1D4
       Magic Points               16                  Traits: Dark Sight, Life Sense, Magic Sense
       Movement                   10m
                                  (flying)
       Strike Rank                +18                 Common Skills: Athletics 80%, Evade 89%,
                                                      Insight 90%, Perception 88%, Persistence
                                                      76%, Resilience 50%, Stealth 90%
                                                      Advanced Skills: Track 99%

      Combat Styles
      As cold as the Grave (Tendrils) 77%

      Weapons
      Type	           Range	      Size	      Reach	            Damage	                AP/HP
      Tendril	        --	         M	         L	                1D6+1D4	               As for Tendril




118
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Razorfiend
      It is hard to see this creature, as it seems to be so thin it appears two-dimensional. Light glitters off a
      vaguely humanoid armature made of thousands of razor-blades.


      It was originally assumed that razorfiends were some form of demonic construct, but they seem
      to be a race in their own right. Speculation as to how such bizarre creatures could arise naturally
      or reproduce has proved fruitless; the secrets of the razorfiends are still locked in whatever far
      plane birthed them. They can be found throughout the cosmos, acting as assassins, torturers and
      bodyguards for dark-hearted creatures.

      The razorfiends are made of edges. If they have any actual weight or mass, it exists in some
      extra dimensional space unplumbed by sorcery or divinity. All that can be perceived of them are
      their edges and they are infinitely sharp. Every inch of the creatures is sharper than the finest
      Bladesharp enchanted sword; touching them is like thrusting one’s hand into slivers of broken
      glass. They can strip flesh from bone by just gently brushing one of their limbs over a victim.

      One of their most curious abilities is their so-called aura of sharpness. Around a razorfiend,
      weapons become keener, edges become more defined and the air becomes almost painfully sharp
      and clear. Soon, even the smoothest, most rounded objects become lethally sharp; there are tales
      of unwary experimenters slicing themselves in two by tightening their belts in the presence of a
      razorfiend.

      Combat Notes
      Razorfiends fight like expert swordsmen, slashing with their razor-edged limbs. Their unnatural
      aura of sharpness means every blow is deep and painful, and inflicts Bleeding without a critical
      hit.

      Aura of Sharpness: Each round a weapon remains within five metres of a razorfiend it begins to
      become unnaturally sharp, as if a Bladesharp spell on page 161 of the Legend Core Rulebook has
      been cast upon it. It grows in power by 1 Magnitude every round to a maximum of 5. The aura
      also confers Bleeding as an automatic effect on the razorfiend’s attacks.

      Made of Blades: Any unarmed attack such as a punch, kick or grapple against a razorfiend causes
      immediate damage to the enemy. They take an 1D6 damage plus Bleeding to D3 locations in the
      case of a grapple, or the extremity if it is an unarmed leg/fist attack. A wooden or weaker weapon
      like a quarterstaff is chopped in half or sundered.




120
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                        Dice         Average            1D20        Hit Location          AP/HP
         STR            2D6+3        10                 1-3         Right Leg              5/5
         CON            2D6+6        13                 4-6         Left Leg               5/5
         SIZ            3D6          11                 7-9         Abdomen                5/6
         INT            2D6+3        10                 10-12       Chest                  5/7
         POW            2D6+1        8                  13-15       Right Arm              5/4
         DEX            2D6+13       20                 16-18       Left Arm               5/4
         CHA            3            3                  19-20       Head                   5/5




         Combat Actions              3                  Armour: 5 point supernatural. No Armour
                                                        Penalty.
         Damage Modifier             +0
         Magic Points                8                  Traits: Life Sense, Magic Sense
         Movement                    8m
         Strike Rank                 +15                Common Skills: Athletics 60%, Evade
                                                        84%, Perception 60%, Persistence 70%,
                                                        Resilience 80%, Stealth 100%
                                                        Advanced Skills: Survival 80%, Track 84%

        Combat Styles
        Razor Blade Smile (Limbs) 87%

        Weapons
        Type 	                  Range	     Size	   Reach	     Damage	                     AP/HP
        Slashing Limbs	         -	         S	      M	         1D8 Bleeding, Sunder	       As for Arm




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                       121
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Root Guardian
        A man-shaped, but larger than man-sized, creature composed of a tangle of roots, vines and leaves,
        which moves with strength and purpose through the shadowed woods. Small forest creatures scurry
        up and down its form, but it pays them no heed.


        It is not only wizards and priests who have sacred or secret places of power to guard against
        intruders. The druids have their own private realms where others should not go, and they have
        learned to form the very stuff of the forest into guardians of these places. While not as powerful
        as mighty constructs such as golems, root guardians are easier to manufacture.

        Root guardians are often given one of two kinds of orders; to guard a specific region against
        invaders or patrol an area of their home, seeking out enemies specified by their creator. This can
        be as narrow as ‘orcs of the Red Fang tribe’ or as broad as ‘all non-elves.’

        Root guardians appear to be large humanoids made up of living roots, vines and branches.
        They have leafy hair which changes colour with the seasons, and they often play host to forest
        creatures. Squirrels gather the nuts which grow from them, and birds sometimes nest on them.
        The normal motion of the root guardian does not disturb its occupants, but they flee if it is
        directly attacked.

        Combat Notes
        The root guardian does not threaten or warn. If its orders cause it to initiate combat, it will do
        so directly, first using Holdfast on opponents, then firing its spines, then closing to use its fists.

        Sorcery: The root guardian has access to the following spell-like powers; Form/Set (Wood),
        Holdfast, and Teleport (from tree to tree). These are all Sorcery spells.

        Spines: The root guardian has a number of extremely sharp, straight, branches growing from it.
        It may fire one such spine as a ranged attack. It will normally have four spines, which grow back
        at a rate of one a day after being used. These spines do the same damage as crossbow bolts and
        use a Combat Action.

        Berries: The root guardian naturally produces incredibly powerful berries during the spring and
        summer. 1D3 berries per day may be harvested from the creature, but only if it is willing. The
        berries function to heal 1D4 points of damage per location, plus cure sickness and hunger. Berries
        harvested from the corpse of the creature are poisonous (see Legend Core Rulebook, page 81, and
        use Blade Venom), only the type becomes Ingested and the effect only strikes the Abdomen.

        Summon Aid: A root guardian can call nearby woodland beings to its aid, using a Combat
        Action – it can only do this for POW/4 (rounded up) times per day and the creatures do not
        immediately appear next to the guardian – they take 1 round to get to the guardian’s position.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                 123
                     Dice         Average           1D20         Hit Location       AP/HP
       STR           4D6+6        20                1-3          Right Leg            4/7
       CON           4D6+2        16                4-6          Left Leg             4/7
       SIZ           3D6+7        18                7-9          Abdomen              4/8
       INT           9            9                 10-12        Chest                4/9
       POW           2D6+7        14                13-15        Right Arm            4/6
       DEX           2D6+5        12                16-18        Left Arm             4/6
       CHA           2D6+3        10                19-20        Head                 4/7




       Combat Actions             2                 Armour: 4 point iron-wood bark. No Armour
                                                    Penalty.
       Damage Modifier            +1D6
       Magic Points               14                Traits: Life Sense.
       Movement                   13m
       Strike Rank                +11               Common Skills: Athletics 77%, Evade 70%,
                                                    Perception 80%, Persistence 60%, Resilience
                                                    87%, Stealth 59%
                                                    Advanced Skills: Survival 82%
                                                    Magic: Manipulation 88%, Sorcery 90%


      Combat Styles
      Forest Grump (Fists, Spines) 93%

      Weapons
      Type 	             Range	        Size	   Reach	       Damage	                 AP/HP
      Fists	             --	           M	      M	           1D6+1D6	                As for Arm
      Spines	            100m	         S	      T	           1D8+1D6 Impale	         4/5




124
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Sanctified Defender
      This being looks like a human man made out of grey light. An aura of shifting energy patterns forms
      and moves behind him.


      The gods feed on belief, or so the theologians suspect. They are strengthened by their worshipper’s
      prayers and faith. In aeons past, the gods met in council. A mortal who believes in any of the
      gods, they realised, was better than a mortal who owes fealty to none. An attack on a god’s temple
      by forces of a rival deity is a part of the accepted clashes within the pantheons – but an attack
      on a temple by a gang of godless barbarians profits none of the gods. It loses belief to entropy,
      to nothingness. This was deemed unacceptable, so the gods put a portion of their power into
      creating the sanctified defenders, referees and neutral bounds-keepers in the wars of the holy and
      unholy. The defenders intercede whenever temples and sacred places of deities are threatened by
      anything other than other religions and acts of god.

      The gods never met in council-like fashion again, so the ranks of the sanctified defenders have
      gone un-replenished despite the deaths of hundreds of them in battle and disaster. It is rare for
      them to manifest now; they must husband their forces carefully and only manifest when the
      greatest temples and holiest of holies are threatened.

      Combat Notes
      Sanctified defenders wield a magical phenomenon known as Divine Force, a blast of power
      that flashes into existence in the shape of the holy symbol of whatever temple the defender is
      currently protecting. They are methodical fighters, sweeping through temple halls and cloisters
      purging them of invaders and thieving treasure-hunters.

      Divine Force: By gesturing, the defender can create a blast of Divine Force to smash a foe. This
      ranged attack requires a Routine Athletics test to remain standing or be knocked over.

      Wrath of the Temple: If anyone defiles an altar or holy symbol or slays a cleric, priest or other
      anointed official of the church within 36 metres of a sanctified defender, without using a Combat
      Action the defender can call down the Wrath of the Temple, which hits the offender with a Fear
      spell combined with the effects of a Lightning Strike spell.

      All-Hallows: The defender is immune to critical hits, negative effects and never suffers problems
      with fatigue and endurance. They cannot be poisoned or otherwise controlled, drained of their
      life and suffer any damage from spells designed to reduce a characteristic.

      Spells: The defender can use the following divine spells; Consecrate, Crash of Thunder, Dismiss
      Magic, Reflection, Soul Sight, Spirit Block, Sunspear, and True Weapon.




126
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                   Dice           Average            1D20        Hit Location          AP/HP
         STR       2D6+8          15                 1-3         Right Leg              5/6
         CON       2D6+8          15                 4-6         Left Leg               5/6
         SIZ       3D6            11                 7-9         Abdomen                5/7
         INT       2D6+3          10                 10-12       Chest                  5/8
         POW       2D6+7          14                 13-15       Right Arm              5/5
         DEX       2D6+9          16                 16-18       Left Arm               5/5
         CHA       2D6+8          15                 19-20       Head                   5/6




         Combat Actions           3                  Armour: 5 points holy shield. No Armour
                                                     Penalty.
         Damage Modifier          +1D2
         Magic Points             14                 Traits: Magic Sense, Dark Sight
         Movement                 8m
         Strike Rank              +13                Common Skills: Athletics 80%, Brawn 70%,
                                                     Evade 85%, Insight 70%, Perception 90%,
                                                     Persistence 80%, Resilience 70%, Stealth
                                                     90%, Unarmed 90%
                                                     Advanced Skills: Meditation 80%, Track 86%
                                                     Magic skills: Pact 99%, Lore (Holy Source)
                                                     98%

        Combat Styles
        Holy Thunder Force (Divine Force) 97%

        Weapons
        Type 	            Range	 Size	      Reach	   Damage	                            AP/HP
        Divine Force	     80m	   M	         --	      1D6+1D2 Special (see above)	       As for Arm




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                     127
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Sapphire Beetle
        The creature is, at first glance, beautiful… a glistening ovoid of deepest blue, three feet long, with
        sparkling lights of faint azure glistening deep within it. As it moves, the glistening claws and
        whirring, stone-devouring teeth become more evident, and its beauty becomes akin to that of a
        rattlesnake or poison toad, a lure to the unwary.


        Sapphire beetles are creatures born out in the swirling eddy of creation from the elemental power
        of earth and often venture to the material plane through natural fissures. Their central bodies
        seem to be composed of a single massive blue gemstone, inhumanly smooth and polished, with
        their legs and other body parts made of smaller stones, moving with organic smoothness. When
        necessary, they can split their carapace to reveal wings of shimmering stone and solid plates of
        gemstone so thin as to be nearly translucent. Since they are very poor flyers, they only take to the
        air in emergencies or when they need to reach food.

        They are not necessarily aggressive, but are extraordinarily vicious fighters, and not at all averse
        to defending themselves to the utmost if attacked or disturbed.

        They are lithivores, capable of surviving on any rock or stone, but have a special love for gems.
        They will seek out rocks rich in diamonds, rubies, emeralds and other precious stones, and
        devour them. A small group of sapphire beetles can turn a profitable mine into a worthless maze
        of tunnels in a few weeks. For this reason, they are considered pests by dwarves and other mining
        races and this, in turn, creates a market for extermination services. The importation of sapphire
        beetles into human cities is usually a capital crime.

        There are some uses for the creatures, however. They excrete a sort of gemstone dust, powdered
        much more finely than most mechanical grinders can manage, which is of use in many magical
        rituals. A few dwarves, considered more foolish than enterprising, have attempted to train them
        as gem sniffers, much as humans train pigs to look for truffles.

        Sapphire beetles speak an earthen dialect perhaps related to elementals, but rarely have much to
        say. Their appetite rules everything they do, and trying to convince one to abandon a particular
        food source takes a great deal of perseverance – tests to do this are usually Hard or Very Hard.

        The treasure of a sapphire beetle will be in the form of undigested gems found in its stomach.

        Combat Notes
        Sapphire beetles will ignore organic life unless they are themselves attacked, or if the beings
        are wearing more than 1,000 SP worth of jewellery. Once engaged in combat, they are vicious,
        biting and clawing with vigour, and using their Sapphire Burst ability to full advantage.

        Sapphire Burst: POW/4 (rounded up) times per day, a sapphire beetle can emit a blinding,
        searing, burst of light. This takes the form of an 8 metre radius burst. All those in the area,
        other than sapphire beetles, must make a Difficult Resilience test or be blinded for 1D6 rounds.
        They must also make a Difficult Evade test or take 1D6 points of searing fire damage from the
        creature’s attack.

        Gem Sense: The sapphire beetle is capable of sensing gems, including their type and value, with
        extraordinary skill. It automatically knows the general concentration of gem stones within one
        mile, and can identify specific stones and types within 36 metres.


Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                 129
                   Dice            Average       1D20      Hit Location        AP/HP
       STR         3D6+7           18            1         Right Rear Leg        5/4
       CON         2D6+7           14            2         Left Rear Leg         5/4
       SIZ         4               4             3         Right Middle Leg      5/3
       INT         6               6             4         Left Middle Leg       5/3
       POW         2D6+7           14            5-9       Abdomen               5/5
       DEX         1D6+7           11            10-13     Thorax                5/6
                                                 14        Right Front Leg       5/4
                                                 15        Left Front Leg        5/4
                                                 16-20     Head                  5/4


       Combat Actions              2             Armour: Gemstone exoskeleton, no Armour
                                                 Penalty.
       Damage Modifier             +0
       Magic Points                14            Traits: Wall Waking, Formidable Natural
                                                 Weapons
       Movement                    10m (Fly
                                   25m)
       Strike Rank                 +9            Common Skills: Athletics 70%, Evade 80%,
                                                 Insight 50%, Perception 70%, Persistence
                                                 71%, Resilience 99%, Stealth 73%
                                                 Advanced Skills: Track 77%


      Combat Styles
      Blue Beetle (Mandibles) 91%

      Weapons
      Type	               Range	        Size	   Reach	         Damage	         AP/HP
      Mandibles	          --	           S	      T	             1D6	            As for Head




130
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Searfellow
      You can dimly make out a shimmering heat haze moving towards you, like a pillar of invisible
      flame.


      Searfellows are odd creatures who are natural denizens of any extremely hot place or plane.
      They are composed entirely of potent sources of heat and sages have tried for centuries to fully
      understand them. They are bitter and hateful creatures, who actively enjoy burning other beings
      to death with their touch. They are not especially bright, and can spend hours roasting a dead
      corpse until there is nothing left but ash. They are also easily confused by changing situations; a
      searfellow who wanders into a town and sets it alight will then blunder wildly through the streets,
      drunk on a sense-field of radically shifting heat sources. This lack of discipline makes them
      unpopular servants, although many powerful beings and elementals of fire can employ them as
      bodyguards or sometimes torturers.

      Searfellows are deathly afraid of water and will not willingly approach or cross it.

      Combat Notes
      A searfellow need only walk through a battlefield to cause havoc, as their mere presence causes
      fires to start, metal to melt, and flesh to burn and blister. They are confident in their combination
      of immateriality and near-invisibility – it is a rare foe indeed that can both perceive and injure
      a searfellow.

      Searing Touch: An unarmed attack from a searfellow deals 2D6 points of fire damage to the
      target. Furthermore, if the target is wearing metal armour, that creature must make a Routine
      Evade test or take 1D6 extra damage instead as the metal heats up.

      Searing Body: A powerful haze of heat surrounds the creature; those who get close enough to
      attack in melee must make a Hard Resilience test or suffer damage at 2D6 points per location
      each Combat Round. Metal armour and weapons can take damage from the intense heat, losing
      1 AP per round. Weapons then lose 2D6 HP per round of combat until destroyed. Wooden
      weapons combust instantly.

      Haze: A searfellow is nigh on invisible and very tricky to hit. They appear as no more than a
      heat haze in combat and are extremely dangerous to fight. Each Combat Round an attacker must
      make a Difficult Perception test to be able to strike at the searfellow without penalty. Failure
      means that all combat rolls are treated as Hard.

      Water Vulnerability: A searfellow is deathly afraid of water. They must make a Hard Persistence
      test to approach a lake or other such large source. If they are immersed in the water they are
      instantly destroyed. Treat water as Concentrated Acid on page 76 of the Legend Core Rulebook for
      purposes of resolving damage against searfellows.




132
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                        Dice      Average                  1D20         Hit Location       AP/HP
         STR            1D6+3     7                        1-20         Pillar of Flame     X/6
         CON            2D6+9     16
         SIZ            3D6       11
         INT            2D6       7
         POW            2D6+7     14
         DEX            2D6+9     16
         CHA            3D6+1     12




         Combat Actions           2                        Armour: None
         Damage Modifier          -1D6
         Magic Points             14                       Traits: Life Sense
         Movement                 10m       (15
                                  fly)
         Strike Rank              +11                      Common Skills: Athletics 80%, Evade 97%,
                                                           Insight 57%, Perception 80%, Persistence
                                                           72%, Resilience 81%, Stealth 99%


        Combat Styles
        Burning Ambition (Unarmed) 87%

        Weapons
        Type	            Range	   Size	           Reach	       Damage	                    AP/HP
        Unarmed	         -	       S	              T	           1D6 Special (see above)	   As for Arm




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                       133
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Sentinel
        On the mountain peak, you see a titanic stone figure, roughly the shape of a humanoid. Its limbs are
        blocky and weathered; its face is a blank apart from a single huge gemstone eye.


        Sentinels are as old as the ancient granite mountains they stand on; the civilisation, race and
        age that birthed them are dust a million times over. All the stars have changed since they were
        made. Their purpose is lost in time and the few sages who study the cryptic sentinels suggest they
        were made to mark borders of some cyclopean kingdom, although others believe the sentinel’s
        placement atop the highest peaks indicate they were built to watch or guard against something
        among the stars.

        A sentinel is a massive construct, always found standing on a mountaintop or atop some other
        huge structure, such as a pyramid. Some stare fixedly in a particular direction; others rotate
        steadily, sweeping their magical gaze across the land below. The area around a sentinel is easy
        to spot as it is utterly lifeless and abandoned, at least on the surface. Some races build fortresses
        underneath mountains guarded by sentinels, as the gaze does not penetrate deeply into the stone.

        The eye of a sentinel is a rare prize indeed; while the power of the gaze is lost when the sentinel
        is smashed, the eye is still capable of channelling almost any amount of magical energy and so
        is valuable to wizards and artificers engaged in crafting powerful devices. Such an eye might be
        sold for 25,000 or more SP.

        Combat Notes
        Sentinels regard all living or animated things as hostile and annihilate them with their magical
        gaze. In rare cases where the gaze is not enough, such as foes protected by any magical protection
        strong enough to deflect its gaze, the sentinel ponderously uproots itself for the first time in
        aeons and slowly remembers how to smash foes with its massive fists.

        Sentinel’s Gaze: This is a cone 600 metres in length and width at its widest point, emanating
        from the sentinel’s eye. It is constantly active. Anyone caught in the open is automatically struck
        by the cone; if cover is nearby, characters can make a Routine Evade test to duck behind it. At
        least three inches of stone or one inch of metal is needed to provide cover against the gaze. A
        character does not need to look into the sentinel’s eye to be affected. The sentinel can choose to
        switch off its gaze, or narrow the area of effect into a smaller cone if it wishes.

        The effects of the sentinel’s gaze vary and the sentinel can choose any of the following effects.

             •	    Diminish (characteristic): The Sentinel can cast this as though it has a Sorcery skill of
                   97% and a Manipulation skill of 100% - it can choose one characteristic per Combat
                   Round as its gaze moves.
             •	    Damaging Glare: Anyone caught in the gaze must make an immediate Hard
                   Resilience test or take 3D6 damage per location. This effect functions per round until
                   the sentinel shifts its gaze.
             •	    Anti-magic: No magical effect can function within the sentinel’s gaze.
             •	    Fear: Anyone caught in the gaze must make a Difficult Persistence test or flee until
                   they are outside the gaze’s area of effect. This is a mind-affecting fear effect.

        Teleport: Instead of using its gaze ability as above, the sentinel can teleport to any point within
        600 metres that it can see clearly.


Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                135
                     Dice         Average            1D20        Hit Location         AP/HP
       STR           9D6+18       50                 1-3         Right Leg              8/14
       CON           6D6+18       39                 4-6         Left Leg               8/14
       SIZ           9D6+18       50                 7-9         Abdomen                8/15
       INT           3D6+6        17                 10-12       Chest                  8/16
       POW           4D6+1        15                 13-15       Right Arm              8/13
       DEX           2D6+3        10                 16-18       Left Arm               8/13
       CHA           2D6          7                  19-20       Head                   8/14




       Combat Actions             3                  Armour: Supernaturally hard stone. No
                                                     Armour Penalty.
       Damage Modifier            +2D12
       Magic Points               15                 Traits: Earth Sense, Life Sense, Magic Sense
       Movement                   10m
       Strike Rank                +14                Common Skills: Athletics 70%, Evade 50%,
                                                     Insight 50%, Perception 120%, Persistence
                                                     100%, Resilience 110%, Unarmed 120%

      Combat Styles
      Sentinel Marvel (Fists) 120%

      Weapons
      Type	           Range	   Size	        Reach	    Damage	                     AP/HP
      Fists	          --	      E	           VL	       1D6+2D12 Sunder	            As for Arm




136
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Swamp Giant
        The stillness of the swamp is broken as a monstrous head appears out of the murky depths. In
        seconds, the entire creature has emerged, a massive humanoid, drenched and muck-covered,
        bellowing his challenge to those who would invade his land.


        Swamp giants dwell in the deepest parts of the swamps, where they have room to shape their
        underwater lairs without breaking the surface or otherwise revealing their presence. Though
        cruel and brutal by nature, they do not seek conflict, but show no mercy to those who enter their
        domain. They are slightly bigger than ogres, making them among the smaller of the true giants.
        Their bodies are hairless, except for a matted tangle of close-cropped black or brown hair on
        their heads, and their hands and feet are webbed. They dress in rough hides and carry weapons
        strapped to their backs.

        Swamp giants are pure carnivores. Mostly, they feed off the rich animal life of the swamps, but
        will happily enrich their diet with passing humanoids. If approached from a position of strength,
        they can sometimes be bribed into serving as guides to the deeper parts of their murky realm.

        Swamp giants normally live alone or in single family groups. Rarely, if the conditions are
        particularly rich, a band will settle in one place as a tribe.

        Combat Notes
        Swamp giants will lurk under the water until the time is right to strike. While not particularly
        intelligent, they are smart enough to observe a group entering the swamp in order to gauge
        their power, and avoid those who clearly outclass them. They will attack first by hurling muck,
        followed by one of the two spears they habitually carry, then finally close to melee range. If there
        is a group of swamp giants, half will close to melee while the others hurl muck to keep opponents
        off-balance.

        Muck: Swamp giants have mastered the art of picking up huge handfuls of sodden muck and
        hurling it at their foes. The muck will splash four metres in every direction from the target.
        Those in the area of effect must make a Routine Evade test to get out of the way, or be knocked
        over and blinded for 2D6 rounds.

        Water Breathing: Swamp giants can breathe water and air equally well. They can survive
        indefinitely either submerged or on land.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                               137
                     Dice            Average               1D20        Hit Location          AP/HP
       STR           2D6+16          23                    1-3         Right Leg               1/8
       CON           2D6+12          19                    4-6         Left Leg                1/8
       SIZ           2D6+14          21                    7-9         Abdomen                 1/9
       INT           2D6+1           8                     10-12       Chest                   1/10
       POW           2D6+3           10                    13-15       Right Arm               1/7
       DEX           2D6+2           9                     16-18       Left Arm                1/7
       CHA           2D6+1           8                     19-20       Head                    -/8




       Combat Actions                2                     Armour: Hide Armour. -2 Armour Penalty.
       Damage Modifier               +1D8
       Magic Points                  10                    Traits: Dark Sense, Night Sight
       Movement                      10m
       Strike Rank                   +7     (+9            Common Skills: Athletics 49%, Evade
                                     armoured)             45%, Perception 43%, Persistence 50%,
                                                           Resilience 88%, Stealth 30%, Swim 70%,
                                                           Unarmed 50%

      Combat Styles
      Swamp Dweller (Longspear, Muck Thrower) 82%

      Weapons
      Type	                 Range	        Size	   Reach	     Damage	                         AP/HP
      Muck Throw	           10m	          L	      --	        1D3+1D8 Blindness	              As for Arm
      Longspear	            --	           L	      VL	        1D10+1 +1D8 Impale	             4/10




138
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Thing in the Lake
        The water boils and half-a-dozen slimy tentacles explode out of it. The writhing tentacles seem to be
        sheathed in a shell of liquid that clings to them as if magically constrained.


        These ghastly lake monsters seem to be related to octopi or squids, but have the magical ability
        to thrive in any body of water, from the frozen seas of the north to stagnant ponds in the lightless
        depths of the underworld. They can fast for centuries by drawing nutrients from the surrounding
        water but prefer to feed on meat and fish.

        Things in the lake have never been clearly seen, as they are always surrounded by a shell of murky
        water and slime. They can magically manipulate the tension of the water, keeping a shell around
        themselves even when crawling out of the lake. This magical field collapses when the thing is
        slain, but the moment it is exposed to the air, it shrivels and dries out, being transformed like a
        creature drawn up from the depths of the ocean.

        Underwater races sometimes cultivate things in the lake, putting their water-controlling abilities
        to good use in building castles and fortresses out of magically constrained water. The horrors
        make excellent guardians and watchdogs, although it is exceedingly difficult to teach them to
        distinguish between friend and foe.

        Combat Notes
        The things use their slimy tentacles to grab and drown people. They prepare the area first by
        creating a wall of water in front of them, giving them cover using their Control Water ability.
        They then lash out with their tentacles, hoping to grab and drown enemies.

        Tentacles: Things have eight long sinuous tentacles, which have a reach of 8 metres.

        Grabby: The thing is tenacious and if it manages to hit the same target in combat with two or
        more of its tentacles, it may attempt to grapple.

        Drowner: If the thing manages to grapple an opponent it can do two things, using a Combat
        Action. It may cause 2D6 damage by constricting the target, usually to the chest or abdomen or
        both, and then drag them down underwater. Use the standard rules in the Legend Core Rulebook
        on page 76.

        Tremorsense: A thing can sense minute vibrations in the water, allowing it to detect the
        movement of any creatures within 35 metres in the same body of water.

        Control Water: The thing can use an ability similar to the Sorcery spell: Form/Set (Water) on
        page 200 of the Legend Core Rulebook. It has a Sorcery skill of 100% and a Manipulation skill of
        100%. It can also make rudimentary constructs from water without the use of that spell; these
        are advanced powers and allow it to build a castle or a fortress from magically hardened water. If
        the thing dies, all its watery constructs go down with it.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                139
                   Dice         Average          1D20        Hit Location          AP/HP
       STR         6D6+18       39               1-2         Left Tentacle 1         7/9
       CON         4D6+6        20               3-4         Right Tentacle 2        7/9
                                                 5-6         Left Tentacle 3         7/9
                                                 7-8         Right Tentacle 4        7/9
       SIZ         3D6+14       25               9-10        Body                    7/11
       INT         5            5                11-12       Left Tentacle 5         7/9
       POW         6            6                13-14       Right Tentacle 6        7/9
       DEX         2D6+5        12               15-16       Left Tentacle 7         7/9
       CHA         1            1                17-18       Right Tentacle 8        7/9
                                                 19-20       Maw                     7/9



       Combat Actions           3                Armour: 7 points of enchanted water armour.
                                                 No Armour Penalty.
       Damage Modifier          +2D6
       Magic Points             6                Traits: Dark Sight
       Movement                 15m swim
       Strike Rank              +9               Common Skills: Athletics 60%, Evade 79%,
                                                 Insight 20%, Perception 75%, Persistence
                                                 70%, Resilience 91%, Swim 120%

      Combat Styles
      Poor Bill (Tentacles, Bite) 93%

      Weapons
      Type	            Range	 Size	     Reach	   Damage	                         AP/HP
      Bite	            --	    L	        M	       1D8+2D6	                        As for Head
      Tentacles	       --	    L	        VL	      1D6+2D6 Special (see above)	    As for Arm




140
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Thorn Sprite
        A tiny winged humanoid, with glistening dragonfly wings, its features curled in a malicious sneer,
        glares balefully for a second before flitting into a thick cluster of thornbushes.


        In the most twisted brambles and impenetrable thickets dwell thorn sprites, malicious fey
        creatures that delight in inflicting pain on passers-by. They are six to eight inches in height and
        impossibly thin, with dragonfly-like wings and sharply pointed features. Their fingers and toes
        seem too long for their bodies, and their skin is rough to the touch, like fine sandpaper. Their
        hair tends to be black and is usually cut in a ragged pattern.

        Thorn sprites live in tangled, thorny, places, amid rosebushes, nettles, thistles and any other
        plants with sharp spikes. They do not seek out victims but, should any outsider happen into
        their realm, they will harass and kill him, unless he brings great gifts, wields great power, or both.

        Politically, thorn sprites dwell in shires, ruled over by a baron and baroness chosen by ancient and
        complex rituals. They follow a slightly corrupted version of the druidic faith, and will sometimes
        trade with other fey or dwellers in the dark woods with temperaments similar to their own.

        Rarely, a thorn sprite will be exiled or voluntarily leave his shire. Sometimes this will occur
        because of a political squabble, other times, because the sprite was somewhat less inclined to
        malicious cruelty than his fellows.

        Combat Notes
        Thorn sprites avoid direct confrontation. They attack unseen, from deep within their thorny
        holdfasts, until their opponents have been killed or forced to flee. Rooting them out is difficult,
        as the thorn mazes in which they dwell provide sufficient cover to grant a –20% penalty to
        enemy attacks. A thorn sprite forced into melee against all but the weakest foes will flee or
        bargain feverishly for its life. Of course, it is almost certain to forego any such deal once it feels
        safe.

        Poison: POW/4 (rounded up) times per day the thorn sprite may spit a poison onto its arrows.
        This poison is extremely dangerous and mimics the effects of Potent Snake Venom from the
        Legend Core Rulebook on page 81.

        Thorn Eruption: POW/4 (rounded up) times per day, the thorn sprite can cause sharp, lethal
        spikes to erupt from nearly any non-living object it can see, within 15 metres. These will deal
        1D4 points of damage to the wielder per round that the item is held or worn. In the case of
        armour, these spikes can be forced to grow on the inside. A weapon’s hilt can become thorn
        covered in a matter of seconds, while an important item can be covered in sharp thorns, and so
        on. If this power is used on armour then all the armoured locations take 1D4 damage per round.
        If the wielder drops the item, they do not take any damage.

        Impaling Immunity: A thorn sprite is immune to the Impale effect.

        Bramblemove: A thorn sprite can move at their full ground or flight speed through any
        undergrowth, no matter how tangled. They are unaffected by any spells which cause natural
        matter to try and entangle them. They can be caught by spider’s webs and the like.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                 141
                Dice          Average            1D20         Hit Location        AP/HP
       STR      2D6+1         8                  1-3          Right Leg            3/4
       CON      2D6+7         14                 4-6          Left Leg              3/4
       SIZ      3             3                  7-9          Abdomen               3/5
       INT      3D6+1         12                 10-12        Chest                 3/6
       POW      4D6+1         15                 13-15        Right Arm             3/3
       DEX      2D6+12        19                 16-18        Left Arm              3/3
       CHA      2D6+7         14                 19-20        Head                  3/4




       Combat Actions         3                  Armour: 3 point thorn armour. No Armour
                                                 Penalty.
       Damage Modifier        -1D4
       Magic Points           15                 Traits: Life Sense, Magic Sense, Dark Sight
       Movement               4m (10m
                              fly)
       Strike Rank            +16                Common Skills: Athletics 90%, Evade 83%,
                                                 Insight 40%, Perception 90%, Persistence
                                                 80%, Resilience 60%, Stealth 99%
                                                 Advanced Skills: Survival 90%, Track 80%

      Combat Styles
      Thornchild (Claws, Sprite Short bow) 70%

      Weapons
      Type 	            Range	 Size	 Reach	            Damage	                      AP/HP
      Claw	             --	    T	    T	                1D3-1D4	                     As for Arm
      Sprite Short bow	 40m	   S	    --	               1D4-1D4 Impale + Poison	     2/4
      				                                             (see above)




142
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Thunderbird
      This creature looks like a blue-black crow crossed with a roc, with a wingspan of a many metres.
      Energy crackles around its claws and beak, and a strong wind sweeps past its dark feathers.


      Thunderbirds may be descended from elementals in ages past but are now wholly creatures of
      the mundane planes. They ride the storm winds ahead of great cyclones and tempests, and are
      considered beings of ill omen by sailors and astrologers alike. They have little interest in the land
      below the clouds, although occasionally a young thunderbird will be caught by a downdraft and
      circle into the thick and heavy lower reaches of the air. They nest atop the highest mountains in
      great communal eyries. Due to their magical nature, thunderbird eggs do not hatch easily; they
      require vast bursts of electrical energy to crack their storm-grey shells. To hatch their clutches,
      thunderbirds use their Weather Mastery ability to herd storms into their mountains. There,
      surrounded by the crackling of thunderbolts, the birds channel the full fury of the storm into
      their offspring.

      Rocs prey on thunderbirds; they fall upon an unsuspecting flock and scatter them, then swoop
      down and catch the slowest. For their part, the thunderbirds gather much of their energy from
      the storm clouds around them. The rest of their diet is meat and carrion.

      Wizards and savants are interested in thunderbirds for their supernatural and electrical qualities.
      Thunderbird feathers and eggs are commonly used in magical devices for weather control and
      hurling lightning. Furthermore, a stolen egg can be used as a lure to bring other thunderbirds
      down to the lowlands, where they can be captured using metal nets or warriors shielded against
      electricity. A thunderbird egg sells for 1,000 SP on average, although evokers with a fascination
      for electrical effects will pay considerably more.

      Combat Notes
      The normal tactics of a flock of thunderbirds is to whip up a storm as fast as they can, then blast
      their foe with a barrage of thunderbolts. Where such an assault is impossible, they simply swoop
      down and claw at the enemy.

      Thunderbolts: Every POW/4 (rounded up) times a day a thunderbird can use their power to
      launch an electrical attack at their enemies. This has a range of 36 metres and does 3D6 points
      of damage.

      Weather Mastery: POW/4 times per day a thunderbird may use a Combat Action to control the
      weather around it, changing the weather pattern into a storm and using that storm to enhance
      its abilities. While the storm is active, the bird’s Thunderbolts now do 4D6 damage. They may
      increase the wind to that of hurricane strength, as on page 232 of the Legend Core Rulebook.
      Doing either costs a Combat Action to initiate. The storm can be several kilometres across
      depending how many thunderbirds there are.




144
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                       Dice         Average            1D20       Hit Location        AP/HP
         STR           20D6+30      100                1-3        Right Claw            7/26
         CON           4D6+21       35                 4-6        Left Claw             7/26
         SIZ           20D6+30      100                7-9        Body                  7/28
         INT           4            4                  10-12      Breast                7/29
         POW           3D6          11                 13-15      Right Wing            7/26
         DEX           3D6          11                 16-18      Left Wing             7/26
                                                       19-20      Head                  7/27




         Combat Actions             2                  Armour: 7 point elemental (wind) armour
                                                       with hide and feathers. No Armour
                                                       Penalty
         Damage Modifier            +4D12
         Magic Points               11                 Traits: Formidable Natural Weapons
         Movement                   12m/25m
         Strike Rank                +10                Common Skills: Athletics 111%, Brawn
                                                       205%, Evade 60%, Perception 70%,
                                                       Persistence 54%, Resilience 110%

        Combat Styles
        Thunder Thunder Thunder (Peck, Claw) 80%

        Weapons
        Type 	             Range	   Size	     Reach	     Damage	               AP/HP
        Peck	              --	      E	        VL	        1D10+4D12	            As for Head
        Claw	              --	      E	        VL	        1D8+1+4D12	           As for Claw




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                 145
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Trash Rat
        The tiny figure skitters on the edge of sight, sensed more than seen. When finally confronted, it
        appears to be a very large rat… but a rat in a half-standing pose, its hind legs somewhat adapted for
        bipedal motion, and one whose forepaws hold a tiny spear, whose eyes contain the unmistakable glint
        of thought.


        Most large cities give little thought to their dumps, or what might go into them. Generations
        of alchemical waste, discharged magical items, bits of broken golems and so forth, suffuse large
        urban trash dumps with a slight, but very real, magical aura. This can have a variety of effects on
        the life forms which dwell among the rot. Trash rats are one of the most common.

        Trash rats are semi-humanoid rats, not quite as intelligent as humans but on a reasonable par
        with orcs and the like. Without the physical might of the orc or the ogre, they rely on speed and
        cunning to survive. Not evil, but utterly without concern for the property of other people, they
        are somewhere between pest and competitor to the humans in whose cities they evolved.

        Rogues guilds often will come to terms with trash rats, even to the point of setting aside sectors of
        the city to be their turf. Other times, the competition is brutal, with both sides raising the stakes
        until war spills out of the slums and into the merchant’s and noble’s quarters.

        Trash rats equip themselves with what they can scavenge. Tiny spears made from cast-off bits of
        wood and metal are a preferred weapon. A human’s dagger makes a fine long sword, while the
        scraps a leatherworker throws away can be shaped into effective armour.

        Combat Notes
        Trash rats rely on stealth, numbers and trickery to win fights, swarming onto rooftops or down
        alleys to launch volley after volley of spears. They will avoid going toe-to-toe with anything
        much larger than a small frog if possible.

        Poison Resistant: Due to the environment in which they live, trash rats gain a +30% bonus
        when making tests against poisons.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                147
                  Dice        Average              1D20        Hit Location       AP/HP
       STR        2D6+1       8                    1-3         Right Leg            -/4
       CON        3D6+1       12                   4-6         Left Leg             -/4
       SIZ        1D6         4                    7-9         Abdomen              -/5
       INT        3D6         11                   10-12       Chest                -/6
       POW        2D6+3       10                   13-15       Right Arm            -/3
       DEX        2D6+9       16                   16-18       Left Arm             -/3
       CHA        2D6+1       8                    19-20       Head                 -/4




       Combat Actions         2                    Armour: None
       Damage Modifier        -1D4
       Magic Points           10                   Traits: Dark Sight
       Movement               5m
       Strike Rank            +12                  Common Skills: Athletics 60%, Brawn 40%,
                                                   Evade 74%, Perception 80%, Persistence 66%,
                                                   Resilience 59%, Stealth 83%, Swim 66%,
                                                   Unarmed 77%

      Combat Styles
      Ratty (Small Javelin, Unarmed) 77%

      Weapons
      Type 	               Range	          Size	      Reach	       Damage	         AP/HP
      Unarmed	             --	             T	         T	           1D3-1D4	        As for Head
      Small Javelin	       15m	            S	         -	           1D6-1D4	        2/4




148
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Unraveller
      All you can see is a cloud of inky darkness, supported on four huge whirlwinds of dark air-like ropy
      legs. A maw of lightning opens and closes at one end. It seems more real than you can comfortably
      perceive, as if you are but a shadow and it is all that ever was.

      When the end of all things comes, when the gods are dead and the stars tire of their courses in
      the sky and fall to earth, when the last battle is fought and there is no more time, then shall the
      unravellers awake. They are the enders, the things made in the beginning to scour all-that-is
      clean of all-that-is and leave the universe utterly empty and dark. They are not the apocalypse;
      they are what comes after, to clean up the debris.

      Sometimes, they wake up early.

      An unraveller is a concentrated knot of nothingness, a pure devouring maw of unimaginable dark
      energy. Their very presence causes reality to splinter and divide and unravel into its component
      parts. A sword struck by an unraveller becomes somehow less real, as if every moment of its
      existence was suddenly disconnected from every other and it was now nothing more than the
      memory or dream of a sword that could be. A man struck by an unraveller begins to doubt his
      past, his future slips away, and his very frame becomes insubstantial. Once the unraveller has torn
      the reality of an object or a creature apart, it devours the component fragments and grows stronger.

      They are not very bright creatures as there is so little of them that higher consciousness is
      impossible, for how can a being think when it devours its own thoughts instantly. They can
      communicate through telepathy, which feels like spears of ice driven into the brain of those
      contacted by them. They are drawn to places of great life and complexity, like cities, as such
      places take the longest to demolish.

      Combat Notes
      It may be impossible to actually kill an unraveller. Certainly, enough damage can be done to the
      creatures to cause them to disintegrate, but perhaps they reform from nothingness when the last
      trumpet sounds and they arise to perform their appointed task. It matters little.

      Unravellers exude an aura that saps the very reality of those around it; this is referred to as the process
      of unravelling. This is their primary mode of attack – the unraveller stands close, occasionally
      opening its mouth to suck up the unravelled pieces of reality around it. Particularly troublesome
      knots of being are torn apart by its tentacles.

      Unravelling Presence: Any creature within 76 metres of an unraveller needs to make a Difficult
      Persistence test each round. Failure results in the loss of a skill drained 5%. Only when out of an
      unraveller’s presence aura does the creature recovers the lost skill points at the rate of 5% per hour
      of rest. The affected creature that loses all points in a skill loses that skill for good until retrained. It
      is as though their very memories are being devoured.

      Unravelling Touch: Any creature struck by an unraveller must make a Difficult Persistence test, or
      suffer the effects of unravelling presence. In addition, any magical item on their person has a 20%
      (+5% per lost skill point) chance of being destroyed as it is unravelled into its component tatters
      of reality. So a creature who has a magical sword and has lost 15% in a skill will find their precious
      item vanishing with a 35% chance.

      Devour Substance: POW/4 (rounded up) times per day an unraveller can use a Combat Action to
      do nothing except suck in broken reality around it. It will regain 5 HP across all locations this way.

      Unravel Spell: Within 80 metres an unraveller can counter and dispel any spell cast at it, it cannot
      affect more than one spell and can only use this ability for POW/4 times per combat.

150
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                       Dice         Average          1D20        Hit Location          AP/HP
         STR           6D6+19       40               1-3         Right Tentacle           5/12
         CON           4D6+11       25               4-6         Left Tentacle            5/12
         SIZ           3D6+21       32               7-9         Upper Body               5/13
         INT           4            4                10-12       Lower Body               5/14
         POW           1D6+6        10               13-15       Right Tentacle           5/11
         DEX           1D6+6        10               16-18       Left Tentacle            5/11
                                                     19-20       Maw                      5/12




         Combat Actions             2                Armour: 5 points of fractured reality. No
                                                     Armour Penalty
         Damage Modifier            +2D8
         Magic Points               10               Traits: Dark Sight, Life Sense, Magic Sense
         Movement                   25m
         Strike Rank                +7               Common Skills: Athletics 90%, Brawn 89%,
                                                     Evade 50%, Perception 60%, Persistence
                                                     52%, Resilience 80%, Stealth 99%

        Combat Styles
        Dark Unraveller (Tentacles, Maw) 100%

        Weapons
        Type 	          Range	    Size	    Reach	   Damage	                       AP/HP
        Maw	            --	       L	       H	       1D12+2D8 Special	             As for Maw
        Tentacle	       --	       L	       VL	      1D8+2D8 Special	              As for Tentacle




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                    151
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Vein
        This obscenity cannot be, and yet, it is. It is the heart and circulatory passages of a man, without bone,
        muscle or skin, and it leaves the ground sodden with blood with every step.

        Veins are creatures of another place and time; they are monsters of nightmare who dwell in
        a place of fleshy walls and seas made from the very blood of life. They are guardians of these
        seas and patrol them endlessly looking for interlopers. Some veins become bored and begin to
        search for a way into other worlds, and those who slip through the cracks soon find plenty to
        occupy themselves as they become enmeshed in the other worlds’ life. No one really knows
        what motivates them besides the sight of blood and viscera. In this way they are often drawn to
        history’s most bloody and brutal battles or such places as gladiatorial arenas and execution sites.
        They like to hunt, but do so slowly and stalk a victim for days – they often drag really evil souls
        back to their dimension and imprison them in their own personal lair.

        Combat Notes
        Veins are unnaturally swift and agile, their bodies able to twist and bend beyond the boundaries
        of bone and muscle. While they can strike with their fists, their preferred attack is via the
        Bloodgush. They also enjoy seeing the effects of their Arterial Spray on attackers, and will often
        permit a blade-wielding attacker to close if they conclude he is no real threat.

        Bloodgush: POW/4 (rounded up) times per day the vein can let loose a spray of corrupted
        blood which acts like strong acid against a victim. The range of the attack is 15 metres and the
        vein’s foul spew can only be cleansed by magical means. The victim must be blessed by a priest
        and only then will magical healing of any kind work on him. Acid rules are found on page 76 of
        the Legend Core Rulebook.

        Arterial Spray: Any attack on a vein splits the creature’s thin invisible skin, showering the victim
        with acidic blood (treated as strong acid). A successful Difficult Evade test avoids this spray.

        Repulsive: All attacks against the vein suffer a penalty of -30% due to the repulsive nature of the
        creature unless an attacker succeeds a Difficult Persistence test.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                     153
                  Dice         Average           1D20       Hit Location       AP/HP
       STR        2D6+8        15                1-3        Right Leg            -/6
       CON        2D6+6        13                4-6        Left Leg             -/6
       SIZ        2D6+7        14                7-9        Abdomen              -/7
       INT        2D6+3        10                10-12      Chest                -/8
       POW        2D6+5        12                13-15      Right Arm            -/5
       DEX        3D6+6        17                16-18      Left Arm             -/5
       CHA        2D6+7        14                19-20      Head                 -/6




       Combat Actions          3                 Armour: None
       Damage Modifier         +1D2
       Magic Points            12                Traits: None
       Movement                8m
       Strike Rank             +14               Common Skills: Athletics 100%, Brawn 80%,
                                                 Evade 92%, Perception 100%, Persistence
                                                 97%, Resilience 80%, Stealth 88%
                                                 Advanced Skills: Track 89%

      Combat Styles
      Bloody Fist (Unarmed) 112%

      Weapons
      Type	               Range	     Size	   Reach	      Damage	                AP/HP
      Unarmed	            --	        S	      T	          1D3+1D2 Special	       As for Arm




154
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Volcano Giant
      Smoke and ash enshroud you, making vision difficult if not impossible. At first, the solid form
      behind the mists seems to be just an outcropping of rock. Then it moves forward, striding out of the
      thick smoke, a gargantuan, grey and crimson human figure wielding a sword of obsidian, and clad
      in scaled red volcanic stone. He walks across a rivulet of lava, ignoring the heat of the molten rock,
      leaving footprints of fire behind him.


      Volcano giants are tremendous creatures who dwell primarily in the cones of semi-active
      volcanoes, their villages surrounding the pits of lava the way early human villages surrounded
      lakes. They feed off the strange creatures which call the molten rock their home, but also venture
      down the slopes of the mountain to hunt bear, goat or man as the mood strikes them. Cruel and
      violent, but also somewhat lazy, it is rare for them to travel far from their homes merely to attack,
      which makes them a tolerable threat – unless their volcano home becomes too active for them to
      stay, in which case, the migrating village becomes a blazing force of devastation, burning a path
      of terror as they trek in search of a new home.

      Combat Notes
      If attacked in or near their homes, volcano giants will dive into the nearest pool of molten rock in
      order to use their lava armour ability. Once this is done, they will begin by hurling rocks in order
      to disable or wound as many foes as possible. They prefer to have the enemy come to them but
      if they are under ranged attack and run out of burning rocks, they will close to melee and begin
      laying about with their clubs. Their ability to set nearby terrain on fire is a great asset when they
      are battling outside their barren, rocky holdfasts, as smoke and flame will disorient most foes
      while bothering the giants not at all.

      Searing Skin: The skin of a volcano giant is blisteringly hot. Anyone making an unarmed attack
      against one must make a Difficult Resilience test or take 1D6+2 fire damage as flames and heat
      prove intolerable. Any flammable material in an eight metre radius of the giant can catch fire
      due to the heat exuded by the creatures; they often leave vast wakes of blazing forest in their path
      as they travel.

      Volcanic Armour: A volcano giant can immerse itself into a pit of lava as a Combat Action,
      emerging a few rounds later covered from head to foot in a massive layer of volcanic armour
      which provides 5 points of armour per location and does not impact the giant’s Strike Rank.
      This boosts the power of Searing Skin and all creatures within 15 metres of the giant must
      make Hard Resilience tests or take 1D6 points of fire damage across all locations. All non-
      magical weapons which strike the volcano giant when so armoured have a 10% chance of being
      destroyed. Wooden weapons, like quarterstaves, burst into flames instantly.

      The volcanic armour can be sustained for 3D4 rounds before it cools and cracks away.

      Lava Habitat: Volcano giants are not bothered by gas, nor poisonous vapours and they can swim
      in lava/hot metal as though it were water.




156
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                    Dice            Average               1D20        Hit Location      AP/HP
         STR        4D6+16          30                    1-3         Right Leg            5/11
         CON        4D6+10          24                    4-6         Left Leg             5/11
         SIZ        2D6+20          27                    7-9         Abdomen              5/12
         INT        2D6+1           8                     10-12       Chest                5/13
         POW        3D6             11                    13-15       Right Arm            5/10
         DEX        2D6+3           10                    16-18       Left Arm             5/10
         CHA        2D6+3           10                    19-20       Head                 5/11




         Combat Actions             2                     Armour: 5 point supernatural rock. No
                                                          Armour Penalty.
         Damage Modifier            +1D12
         Magic Points               11                    Traits: None.
         Movement                   10m
         Strike Rank                +9                    Common Skills: Athletics 70%, Evade 75%,
                                                          Perception 77%, Persistence 60%, Resilience
                                                          90%, Unarmed 80%

        Combat Styles
        Fire Lord (Great Sword) 90%

        Weapons
        Type 	             Range	       Size	   Reach	   Damage	                                  AP/HP
        Great Sword	       --	          H	      L	       2D8+1D12 Bleed, Impale, Sunder	          6/12




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                          157
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Wastedwellers
        The figure is so wrapped in clothing that it is impossible to see anything other than a roughly
        humanoid shape. Only the eyes, yellow as fine topaz, peek through the facial wrappings. Then he
        unwraps his face, revealing a head with the features of a man, but seemingly carven from granite
        given something of the softness of flesh.


        Wastedwellers are so-named because they live in the most barren and inhospitable places in the
        world, in windswept and rocky deserts or barren, near-lifeless mountain peaks. They are not an
        evil people but they do not like having anything to do with other races, whom they consider
        either weak and soft or crude and barbaric.

        They are of human size and shape, but their skin has the colour and rough feel of polished
        granite, though it moves much as flesh does and is not immune to slashing blades or crushing
        blows. Their eyes are usually yellow or light tan, and their hair ranges from a grey so light as to be
        almost white to so dark as to be near black, but no truly white or black hair has ever been seen.
        They do not grow facial hair. Their features are hard but not essentially unattractive, and they
        embody the full range of facial types, from hideous to beautiful.

        Culturally, they are stoic, disciplined and isolationist. They seek no contact with outsiders and
        will deal with them, if necessary, only in accordance to strict protocols and procedures. Their
        interactions among themselves are likewise governed by strict laws, with a policy for every
        possible dealing and formal guidelines for every interaction from morning greetings to intimacy.
        Outsiders find this a very tricky society to fathom and thus all Culture tests and interaction tests
        within the society are subject to a penalty, starting at Difficult. For every misstep or faux pas, the
        penalty increases one step downward.

        They are omnivores, living by hunting and gathering. They need relatively little food or drink
        compared to most life, which is the only thing enabling them to live and prosper in the harsh
        realms they call home.

        Wastedwellers are rumoured to have come from an elemental plane which has ties to earth.

        Combat Notes
        Wastedwellers neither seek combat nor run from it. They do enjoy proving their strength and
        endurance in battle, and so may lean toward a violent solution when not absolutely required,
        but they are not an especially warlike people. Once battle is joined, they fight fearlessly and
        mercilessly, but not stupidly. If losing badly, they will break from battle if doing so will not mean
        exposing the rest of the tribe or village to danger. If combat is anticipated, they will take full
        tactical advantage of the terrain and their abilities.

        Poison Resistance: Wastedwellers gain a +30% bonus to their Resilience tests to stave off the
        effects of poison.

        Hardy: Wastedwellers need only one-quarter as much food or water as other humanoids. They
        take half as much time to find sources of food and water, and their Survival tests are made with
        a +40% bonus.

        Earthy Connection: Wastedwellers can use the Form/Set Earth spell on page 200 of the Legend
        Core Rulebook as though they had a Sorcery skill of 75% and a Manipulation skill of 85%.


Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                 159
                      Dice        Average            1D20        Hit Location       AP/HP
       STR            3D6+1       12                 1-3         Right Leg            1/6
       CON            4D6         14                 4-6         Left Leg             1/6
       SIZ            2D6+6       13                 7-9         Abdomen              1/7
       INT            3D6         11                 10-12       Chest                1/8
       POW            3D6         11                 13-15       Right Arm            1/5
       DEX            3D6+1       12                 16-18       Left Arm             1/5
       CHA            3D6         11                 19-20       Head                 1/6




       Combat Actions             2                  Armour: Light Leather. No Armour Penalty.
       Damage Modifier            +0
       Magic Points               11                 Traits: Earth Sense
       Movement                   8m
       Strike Rank                +11 (+9            Common Skills: Athletics 75%, Brawn 90%,
                                  when               Evade 77%, Perception 99%, Persistence
                                  Amoured)           88%, Resilience 100%, Stealth 71%,
                                                     Unarmed 80%
                                                     Advanced Skills: Survival 99%, Track 80%


      Combat Styles
      Desert Warrior (Longsword, Spear) 80%

      Weapons
      Type	             Range	 Size	    Reach	   Damage	                                AP/HP
      Longsword	        --	    M/L	     L/L	     1D8 / 1D10 Bleed, Impale, Sunder (2H)	 6/12
      Desert Spear	     30m	   H	       --	      1D8, Impale	                           3/8




160
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Widowshark
      This massive shark is slate-grey in colour, with bluish streaks along its belly. Its eyes glow a fearsome,
      unnatural red. It is a truly terrifying sight and leaves your blood to run cold.

      It is said that sharks are among the oldest of creatures, that their kind swam the oceans when the
      world was young and dinosaurs were a common sight, when the gods danced in the new surf and
      all the sorrows and tragedies of history were yet undreamt of. In these latter days, demons coupled
      with all manner of beings to spawn their children; back then, their options were more limited and
      so they sired the widowsharks, sharks with demonic blood running in their cold veins.

      The widowsharks cruise the waters of trade routes and shipping lanes or come closer to the shore
      to lurk near fishing grounds. They have no fear of ships or sailors; indeed, such men are their
      favourite meat. Widowsharks can pluck sailors from the deck or keepers from their lighthouse
      with their dark magicks. They are the terror of the deeps given shape and form and mind, and
      are capable of devastating massive galleons in a single bite.

      In the wildest winters, when no ship can put to sea, it is said the widowsharks all swim down to
      the darkest reaches of the sea and there they hold lightless, wordless rites while offering bloody
      sacrifices to their demon ancestors. At least, sailors tell such tales, but what sort of man could
      have witnessed the rituals of the deep and returned alive?

      Combat Notes
      Widowsharks are cunning and patient; they know no ship can outrace them while they hold mastery of
      the weather, so are content to shadow a vessel for days, probing its crew’s thoughts. They prefer to pick
      foes off one by one with their spells, but are prepared to smash a vessel into splinters and savagely devour
      the drowning crew if their magic proves ineffectual.

      Any widowshark that manages to establish a grapple in a combat round can attempt to swallow a foe
      whole. Widowsharks have supernaturally tough skin and bodies, making them truly dangerous monsters.

      Swallow: A widowshark can try to swallow a grabbed opponent smaller than it by making a successful
      grapple against that foe. Once inside, the opponent takes acid damage as per Concentrated Acid on page
      76 of the Legend Core Rulebook. Any creature swallowed takes an extra 1D6 damage as the shark uses its
      powerful muscles to try and crush them. A creature can attempt to cut its way out using a short sword
      or dagger; the shark’s membranous interior is considered to be AP 5 and HP 15 within its digestive tract
      – once free, the hole closes over and any other trapped opponent must cut their own way out. A Hard
      Brawn test can be used if the creature is not armed or just needs to escape with brute strength.

      A widowshark’s gullet can hold numerous foes, as much as two galleons worth of men and broken ships.

      Scent: A widowshark can notice creatures by scent within a half a mile and can detect blood in the water
      at a range of up to one mile.

      Bad Weather: A widowshark is always followed by incredibly bad storms, foul weather and dangerously
      churning waters. It can suppress this ability at will but cannot create any other weather but storms.
      Weather information can be found on page 231 of the Legend Core Rulebook.

      Sorcerous Shark: Widowsharks can use the following Sorcery spells as though they possessed a
      Sorcery skill of 90% and a Manipulation skill of 100%; Animate (Water), Attract (Missiles), Dominate
      (Humanoid), Telepathy, Teleport, and Wrack.

      Excellent Swimmer: A widowshark has a +40% bonus to Swim tests, as well as a +30% bonus to any
      Evade test made to avoid a water-based hazard.


162
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                        Dice           Average            1D20        Hit Location          AP/HP
         STR            6D10+100       133                1-3         Tail                   40/50
         CON            6D10+60        93                 4-8         Hindbody               40/50
         SIZ            4D10+200       222                9-13        Forebody               40/50
         INT            5              5                  14          Right Fin              40/50
         POW            4D6            14                 15          Left Fin               40/50
         DEX            4D6            14                 16-20       Head                   40/50




         Combat Actions                2                  Armour: Demonskin armour. No Armour
                                                          Penalty.
         Damage Modifier               +6D12
         Magic Points                  14                 Traits: Life Sense, Magic Sense
         Movement                      30m
         Strike Rank                   +10                Common Skills: Athletics 100%, Brawn
                                                          140%, Evade 120%, Perception 100%,
                                                          Persistence 90%, Resilience 115%,
                                                          Stealth 99%, Swim 130%
                                                          Advanced Skills: Track 99%

        Combat Styles
        Jaws of the Deep (Bite) 115%

        Weapons
        Type 	              Range	     Size	     Reach	           Damage	               AP/HP
        Bite	               --	        E	        VL	              10D8+6D12	            As for Head




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                      163
      Windwarrior
      A whirling of leaves announces the creature’s presence… a sword and shield hover in the air near the
      disturbance, and a breeze springs from nowhere. A voice calls from the spot where the two weapons
      float. ‘Stand fast and face me challenge, if ye dare!’


      The planes are infinite and contain an equally infinite variety of beings. On an airy plane in
      the multiverse, some particularly curious and playful elementals found themselves endlessly
      fascinated by the battles and warfare of the material realm. Eager to indulge in this sport
      themselves, they journeyed to the Mortal Verse, where they borrowed weapons and shields and
      called themselves windwarriors. Since they merely return to their home plane if they are slain, to
      them, this is all a great game; they seem unaware that any they slay will be forever lost to those
      who care about them.

      Windwarriors are not evil minded creatures, just uncaring and clueless. They seek only challenge
      and excitement, and do not act sadistically or attack the unarmed. They will not force a fight, but
      anyone who accepts their challenge or who attacks them will be fought with full vigour.

      Windwarriors use a sword and shield combat style, and are dangerous adversaries.

      Combat Notes
      Windwarriors are here to fight and do so with gusto. They will use their Buffet ability to keep
      foes off balance while striking with their chosen weapon, which is usually a long sword. Since
      there is no difference, to their mind, between being killed and running away (both are losing in
      their game), they will fight to the death without fear.

      Buffet: Supernaturally strong winds flow around a windwarrior constantly as they howl and
      screech with the force of nature. Any creature within five metres of one of these warriors needs to
      make Difficult Resilience tests or suffer a -20% penalty on rolls to hit the monster, due to being
      slammed by strong winds. Regardless of this, all ranged attacks save for spells are made at a -30%
      penalty when battling a windwarrior.

      Hard to See: So long as the creature holds a sword and a shield, it can be fought with few
      problems. Should it drop the weapons, it becomes completely invisible. A subtle change in the
      air here and there is the only clue. A Very Hard Perception test allows an opponent to attack the
      creature, or otherwise faces a massive -80% penalty to hit.




164
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                    Dice          Average        1D20       Hit Location      AP/HP
         STR        2D6+7         14             1-3        Right Leg           3/6
         CON        2D6+7         14             4-6        Left Leg            3/6
         SIZ        2D6+7         14             7-9        Abdomen             3/7
         INT        3D6           11             10-12      Chest               3/8
         POW        2D6+6         13             13-15      Right Arm           3/5
         DEX        3D6+7         18             16-18      Left Arm            3/5
         CHA      3D6             11             19-20      Head                3/6




         Combat Actions           3              Armour: 3 points supernatural armour. No
                                                 Armour Penalty.
         Damage Modifier          +1D2
         Magic Points             13             Traits: None
         Movement                 10m
         Strike Rank              +15            Common Skills: Athletics 77%, Brawn 80%,
                                                 Evade 70%, Perception 66%, Persistence
                                                 60%, Resilience 77%

        Combat Styles
        Wind Warrior (Sword & Shield, 1-H Sword) 82%

        Weapons
        Type 	       Range	 Size	 Reach	 Damage	                                    AP/HP
        Longsword	 --	      M/L	 L/L	    1D8 / 1D10+1D2 Bleed, Impale, Sunder (2H)	 6/12
        Kite Shield	 --	    H	    S	     1D4	                                       4/18




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                            165
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Wintersinger
        This creature is a vaguely human-shaped shimmer in the air, as if light were refracting through ice
        crystals and creating a bright shadow of a man. A high-pitched and beautiful voice begins to sing.


        Wintersingers are a species of undead arising from those who die from frostbite and exposure.
        Technically, they are not unquiet dead; a wintersinger is not actually the spirit of someone who
        died in the cold and does not resemble any human who ever lived or died. They are simply the
        spirits of death in the cold and the frost, of lonely, frozen sorrow. They are malicious in their
        cold, cold way. A wintersinger might drift through a village, bringing ice with it, but would seem
        not to notice the folk of the village as they freeze and die – however, it very much knows they are
        there and what its presence does to them. Wintersingers are cruel in an abstract fashion.

        Fire repels them, even in their ghostly form. They are clever, though, and will stay out of reach
        of torchlight and sing down a chill wind that no flame can endure. According to the texts of the
        Unknown Sages, wintersingers tend to follow the course of winter across the face of the world,
        but small groups have been found all year around in certain ice-bound temples and frost-seared
        druid groves.

        Combat Notes
        Wintersingers prefer to float serenely, singing Songs of Ice and watching enemies freeze to death
        with detached disinterest. It is only when confronted with fire or weapons that can injure them
        that the wintersingers begin to fight, slashing at enemies with their icy claws.

        Song of Ice: Wintersingers can create a 40 metre aura of cold around themselves by making a
        free successful Routine Sing test. The cold aura is treated like that of Intense Cold found on page
        84 of the Legend Core Rulebook. Remaining undamaged per round in this aura requires a Hard
        Resilience test as cold winds and biting freezing mist roil around the wintersinger’s incorporeal
        form.

        Freezing Touch: The wintersinger’s claws deal as extra 1D6 of cold damage.

        Ice Statue: A wintersinger can create a physical body for itself out of ice. This physical body
        has the same statistics as the wintersinger. The cold body can put out fires and interact with the
        physical world. Using fire to harm it will also harm the wintersinger inside the shell, though the
        creature gains the benefit of frozen armour to protect it.

        Making an ice body takes eight hours. A wintersinger can leave an ice body at will and return
        to reanimate it later. The lair of a wintersinger is often marked by dozens of half-melted or half-
        formed ice bodies.

        It Burns: Wintersingers take normal damage from fire attacks even when incorporeal; fire
        essentially harms them like a magic weapon.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                              167
                      Dice       Average            1D20       Hit Location       AP/HP
       STR            2D6+7      14                 1-3        Right Leg            5/5
       CON            3D6        11                 4-6        Left Leg             5/5
       SIZ            2D6+6      13                 7-9        Abdomen              5/6
       INT            2D6+6      13                 10-12      Chest                5/7
       POW            3D6        11                 13-15      Right Arm            5/4
       DEX            3D6x2      21                 16-18      Left Arm             5/4
       CHA            2D6+6      13                 19-20      Head                 5/5




       Combat Actions            3                  Armour: 5 point frozen shell (ice body
                                                    only). No Armour Penalty
       Damage Modifier           +1D2
       Magic Points              11                 Traits: None
       Movement                  8m (10m
                                 when
                                 incorporeal)
       Strike Rank               +17                Common Skills: Athletics 70%, Evade
                                                    88%, Perception 73%, Persistence 90%,
                                                    Resilience 100% (50% vs. Fire based
                                                    damage), Sing 100%, Stealth 100%

      Combat Styles
      Winter’s Cut (Claws) 90%

      Weapons
      Type 	          Range	     Size	     Reach	   Damage	                    AP/HP
      Claw	           --	        M	        M	       1D6+1D2+1D6 (cold)	        As for Arm




168
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Wise Hare
      It is a rabbit with opposable thumbs, leather armour, and a longbow.


      Wise hares dwell in the glades and sunlit verges of fae-like realms, but also roam fields in the
      realm of mortals. They are hares, for all intents and purposes, living in burrows and nibbling on
      carrots. However, most burrows, of course, do not include portcullises or battlements, nor do
      most hares grow their carrots in neat rows defended by elite garden archers. Each burrow is a
      little fiefdom ruled by a hare baron, but the wise hares have few wars – their title is well earned
      and they are among the most peaceful and pleasant of fey species.

      The wise hares have mastered the craft of metalworking but rarely use it for anything more
      than making shiny buttons for waistcoats or cunning devices of clockwork. They have no heavy
      industry and are poor masons. They worship nature in a feral, abstract sense, having many nature
      worshippers but few priests. Most wise hares stay well away from the cities and predations of ‘big
      folk,’ but a few hare heroes have gone out into the world of men and acquitted themselves are
      well as any adventurer.

      Combat Notes
      Wise hares commonly use finely-made longbows, which they are adept at firing from hiding.
      An attack from a brigade of hares is almost always accompanied with spells from a hare nature
      magician using divine spells.

      Jump Good: Wise hares have an ability which functions like Defiant Leap on page 220 of the
      Legend Core Rulebook.

      Sneaky Softly: Wise hares have a bonus of +20% to Stealth skill tests.




170
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                  Dice            Average           1D20        Hit Location         AP/HP
         STR      1D6+1           5                 1-3         Right Leg              1/3
         CON      1D6+6           10                4-6         Left Leg               1/3
         SIZ      1D3             2                 7-9         Abdomen                1/4
         INT      1D6+6           10                10-12       Chest                  1/5
         POW      2D6+7           14                13-15       Right Arm              1/2
         DEX      3D6+6           17                16-18       Left Arm               1/2
         CHA      2D6+6           13                19-20       Head                   -/3




         Combat Actions           3                 Armour: Leather armour. -2 Armour Penalty.
         Damage Modifier          -1D6
         Magic Points             14                Traits: Dark Sight
         Movement                 12m
         Strike Rank              +14 (+12          Common Skills: Athletics 80%, Evade 89%,
                                  when              Perception 90%, Persistence 60%, Resilience
                                  armoured)         59%, Stealth 81%
                                                    Advanced Skills: Acrobatics 80%, Survival
                                                    89%, Track 95%

        Combat Styles
        Arrows at Dawn (Longbow) 89%

        Weapons
        Type 	               Range	         Size	   Reach	      Damage	              AP/HP
        Hare Longbow	        175m	          M	      --	         1D6+2-1D6	           3/5




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                  171
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Withering Cadaver
        This hideous entity is a vaguely humanoid shape composed of rotting flesh and protruding bone,
        stumbling forward with its ramshackle hands outstretched. Scraps of skin and muscle flake and drop
        from its decaying body as it moves.


        Withering cadavers are produced when an attempt to create a more powerful undead such as a
        wight fails. Enough energy is infused into the corpse to animate it, but not enough to make a
        direct link with the spirit. The process of animation awakens latent survival instincts and animal
        drives, giving it a sense of self-preservation and hunger. Without a full channel to the undead
        energies to preserve its dead tissues, the body begins to rot. Its instinct of self-preservation forces
        it to hunt out fresh flesh to renew its own shell.

        The cadavers do not work well with other undead as they tend to rip the flesh off zombies and
        ghouls even when ordered not to. They are therefore normally turned loose and left to spread fear
        across the countryside. Few survive longer than a few months; most soon crumble into piles of
        rotting flesh as the decay spreads faster than they can graft new flesh to their bones.

        Combat Notes
        The sole aim of the cadaver is to incapacitate its opponent so it can steal his flesh. Most cadavers
        just batter their foes into unconsciousness, but the monsters are smart enough to grapple small
        foes and carry them off, or choke an enemy, or flood a room with water and leave its victims to
        drown.

        Fleshstealer: When a foe has been incapacitated and rendered unconscious, a withering cadaver
        moves quickly to pull the flesh from the bones. Lumps of skin, muscle and cartilage worm their
        way off the victim and up the cadaver’s arms. The cadaver must make a successful Brawn test to
        use this power. The unconscious victim is allowed an opposed Resilience test to resist the effect.
        Each round they fail the test, the cadaver draws a point of CHA from their body.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                  173
                  Dice          Average          1D20       Hit Location         AP/HP
       STR        2D6+6         13               1-3        Right Leg              -/6
       CON        4D6           14               4-6        Left Leg               -/6
       SIZ        2D6+6         13               7-9        Abdomen                -/7
       INT        3D6           11               10-12      Chest                  -/8
       POW        3D6           11               13-15      Right Arm              -/5
       DEX        3D6           12               16-18      Left Arm               -/5
                                                 19-20      Head                   -/6




       Combat Actions           2                Armour: None
       Damage Modifier          +1D2
       Magic Points             11               Traits: Life Sense, Magic Sense, Formidable
                                                 Natural Weapons
       Movement                 8m
       Strike Rank              +12              Common Skills: Athletics 70%, Brawn 60%,
                                                 Evade 73%, Perception 59%, Persistence 61%,
                                                 Resilience 60%, Stealth 77%, Unarmed 80%
                                                 Advanced Skills: Track 80%

      Combat Styles
      Brutal Claw (Claws) 80%

      Weapons
      Type 	          Range	        Size	   Reach	         Damage	               AP/HP
      Claw	           --	           M	      M	             1D6+1D2	              As for Arm




174
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
      Woodsong
      This is a small humanoid with green-blue skin, shaggy lavender hair, and green eyes. It is holding a
      harp scaled to its size and carries a wide variety of other instruments tucked into various parts of its
      clothing. Its every movement produces a pleasing sound.


      Woodsongs are fey with a particular affinity for music of all types. Indeed, they cannot move
      without making noise; the simplest flick of a finger or shake of a head gives off a short refrain.
      These sounds are pleasant in themselves, but the woodsongs have also developed complex dances
      which incorporate this bodily music, creating symphonies born from motion.

      They enjoy making music among themselves and are masters of instrument manufacture. Many
      of them spend some time away from their own kind, wandering the woods nearer to human and
      elven settlements, in order to learn of new types of music or find a musician to patronise.

      Woodsongs are generally benign. They welcome visitors who come in peace, especially those
      who have musical talent. Any musically inclined adventurer will find Woodsongs make good
      allies and friends. They are fickle creatures, though, and do not welcome prolonged stays in
      their territory. Creatures who enter their glens with violence in mind will find themselves under
      constant sonic assault.

      Woodsongs generally get on very well with humans, elves, gnomes and halflings. They consider
      dwarves to be tolerable and strongly distrust many of the other races.

      Combat Notes
      If attacked, or if they feel a need to drive out intruders, woodsongs use their magical abilities as
      much as possible, preferring to keep well out of range of any melee combat. If the only choice
      is to battle hand-to-hand or flee, woodsongs do not engage and prefer to run since their claws
      have very little effect.

      Discordant Blast: A woodsong can emit a ghastly cacophony of sound up to POW/4 (rounded
      up) times per day. This sonic blast is a 15 metre radius and causes 2D6 points of damage to
      all locations of all non-woodsong creatures in the area. They are also deafened and stunned as
      per the rules on page 79 of the Legend Core Rulebook. This effect lasts for 1D6 rounds for the
      deafness, and 1D4 for the stun. A successful Hard Persistence test negates the woodsong’s attack.

      Sound Off: Woodsongs are completely immune to any attack or spell that relies on sound.

      Never Silent: The woodsong cannot move silently. It cannot use the Stealth skill unless their
      movement is magically silenced.

      Sounds: The woodsong can cast Phantom Sense (Sound) on page 202 of the Legend Core
      Rulebook, with a Sorcery skill of 90% and a Manipulation skill of 100%




176
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                        Dice      Average            1D20        Hit Location      AP/HP
         STR            2D6+2     9                  1-3         Right Leg           -/4
         CON            2D6+5     12                 4-6         Left Leg            -/4
         SIZ            1D3+4     6                  7-9         Abdomen             -/5
         INT            2D6+3     10                 10-12       Chest               -/6
         POW            3D6+5     16                 13-15       Right Arm           -/3
         DEX            3D6+5     16                 16-18       Left Arm            -/3
         CHA            3D6+5     16                 19-20       Head                -/4




         Combat Actions           3                  Armour: None
         Damage Modifier          -1D4
         Magic Points             16                 Traits: Magic Sense
         Movement                 6m
         Strike Rank              +13                Common Skills: Athletics 60%, Dance
                                                     80%, Evade 70%, Insight 80%,
                                                     Perception 79%, Persistence 69%,
                                                     Resilience 55%, Sing 90%, Unarmed
                                                     30%


        Combat Styles
        Love Tap (Claws) 65%

        Weapons
        Type 	           Range	   Size	     Reach	            Damage	           AP/HP
        Claw	            --	      T	        T	                1D2-1D4	          As for Arm




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                             177
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
        Wyrdling
        This creature is a humanoid dressed in a light shift. She floats serenely above the ground and her eyes
        glow a bright yellow colour. She carries a silver sword lightly in one hand.


        Wyrdlings are minor agents of destiny that dwell primarily in frozen regions. Such icy wastelands
        produce more than their fair share of heroes of indomitable will and heroism, but who are also
        in need of a little push or guidance to get them to where they should be. For every hero who
        charges off and slays the dragon in accordance with the designs of the gods, there are four who
        will just slope off to the nearest inn and never amount to anything. The wyrdlings are dispatched
        to convince such heroes to do what is demanded of them by fate.

        While most wyrdlings are encountered in the polar wastes, the servants of fate can be found
        anywhere. They are secretive creatures, spending most of their time in great hidden monasteries
        carved into glaciers or the sides of mountains. These places might sound dour and forbidding
        but wyrdlings are actually quite merry folk. They know they are the lowest agents of fate and
        their place is to obey the commands of the superiors, the stern wyrdweavers. These cryptic
        entities assign missions to the wyrdlings, such as ‘fly to such-and-such a dungeon and inform
        those you find there they on the wrong track and must quest immediately for the jewellery of
        some dead person,’ and so on. Privately, the wyrdlings suspect that the wyrdweavers are losing
        control of the web of fate, for many missions of late have been nonsensical or simply wrong.

        Wyrdlings have a certain amount of dispensation to tweak destiny; while they cannot alter a
        fate, they can adjust it enough for the pesky free will of mortals to break it and create another.
        The older wyrdlings never use this power, seeing it as a breach of their sacred trust, but younger
        wyrdlings meddle all the time, both to amuse themselves and ensure that all things come out
        for the best.

        Combat Notes
        All wyrdlings carry a destiny sword, an extension of their own sacred duty. Only a wyrdling can
        wield a destiny sword, for in the hands of any other creature it becomes just a fine quality long
        sword. When forced to fight, wyrdlings use their swords to cut away at the fate of their enemies,
        making them more vulnerable to disaster.

        Destiny Sword: Anyone struck by a destiny sword must make a Difficult Persistence test or
        suffer a -40% penalty to their next test, whatever it may be.

        Alter Fate: As a Combat Action, a wyrdling can adjust the fate of a creature by touching it. The
        creature can alter the outcome of a single skill test in this way, by + or -10-30%, as it chooses.
        It can have up to three active cases of fate alteration like this active at any one time. A wyrdling
        can use this ability as a ranged attack with a range of 35 metres, but the luck bonus or penalty is
        reduced to + or -5-15%. They can use this power POW/4 (rounded up) times per day.

        Stuff of Magic: Wyrdlings can create incredible illusions and can use all of the Phantom (sense)
        spells on page 202 of the Legend Core Rulebook. They cast these as if they had a Sorcery skill of
        88% and a Manipulation skill of 85%.

        Who am I?: Wyrdlings can change their physical appearance to appear to be someone else
        entirely. Their deception can only be detected if a successful Impossible Perception test is made.
        They often use this to put mortals on the right path.



Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                                                                                                                  179
                Dice          Average            1D20        Hit Location          AP/HP
       STR      2D6+3         10                 1-3         Right Leg              45
       CON      3D6           11                 4-6         Left Leg               4/5
       SIZ      3D6           11                 7-9         Abdomen                4/6
       INT      2D6+3         10                 10-12       Chest                  4/7
       POW      3D6           11                 13-15       Right Arm              4/4
       DEX      4D6+1         15                 16-18       Left Arm               4/4
       CHA      4D6+2         16                 19-20       Head                   4/5




       Combat Actions         2                  Armour: 4 point supernatural cloth. No
                                                 Armour Penalty.
       Damage Modifier        +0
       Magic Points           11                 Traits: Magic Sense, Life Sense
       Movement               8m
       Strike Rank            +13                Common Skills: Athletics 60%, Evade 73%,
                                                 Perception 90%, Persistence 95%, Resilience
                                                 80%, Sing 88%, Stealth 74%
                                                 Advanced Skills: Track 90%

      Combat Styles
      Weapon of Fate (Longsword) 91%

      Weapons
      Type	           Range	 Size	   Reach	 Damage	                                       AP/HP
      Longsword	      --	    M/L	    L/L	   1D8 / 1D10 Bleed, Impale, Sunder (2H)	        6/12




180
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
                    Legend & Open Content
          Here at Mongoose Publishing, we want what we truly believe to be one of the best fantasy
          RPGs on the market to be easy to use and modify. We have therefore made this rulebook
                      Open Content, in conjunction with the Open Game Licence.

            All the text of this book is designated as Open Content – this means you are free to use
          the Open Game Licence (overleaf ) to reproduce this text and build upon it with your own
         scenarios and mechanics. You can even print and sell such work, if that is your desire (and we
                         would wish you the very best of luck if you choose to do this!).

         By using the Open Content of this book, you also have permission to download the Legend
        Compatible logo from our web site (on the Legend product pages), and use that on any Legend
             work you publish, to demonstrate your material is part of the wider Legend family.

                        Please note that the artwork in this book is not Open Content.

           All books in the core Legend range (those whose titles have the word ‘Legend’ in them)
          will also be designated as Open Content, allowing you to expand your own games in many
            different directions, while maintaining a solid root that everyone will be familiar with.

         For example, you might be using Legend to produce your own gaming world. If you wanted
        to add some high seas action, you can simply and quickly bring over the Open Content rules
        we produce in, say, Pirates of Legend, knowing that everyone who plays Legend will at least be
                                           familiar with those rules.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
  OPEN GAME LICENSE Version 1.0a
  The following text is the property of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. and is Copyright 2000 Wizards of the Coast, Inc
  (‘Wizards’). All Rights Reserved.
  1. Definitions: (a)’Contributors’ means the copyright and/or trademark owners who have contributed Open Game
  Content; (b)’Derivative Material’ means copyrighted material including derivative works and translations (including
  into other computer languages), potation, modification, correction, addition, extension, upgrade, improvement,
  compilation, abridgment or other form in which an existing work may be recast, transformed or adapted; (c)
  ‘Distribute’ means to reproduce, license, rent, lease, sell, broadcast, publicly display, transmit or otherwise distribute;
  (d)’Open Game Content’ means the game mechanic and includes the methods, procedures, processes and routines
  to the extent such content does not embody the Product Identity and is an enhancement over the prior art and
  any additional content clearly identified as Open Game Content by the Contributor, and means any work covered
  by this License, including translations and derivative works under copyright law, but specifically excludes Product
  Identity. (e) ‘Product Identity’ means product and product line names, logos and identifying marks including trade
  dress; artifacts; creatures characters; stories, storylines, plots, thematic elements, dialogue, incidents, language, artwork,
  symbols, designs, depictions, likenesses, formats, poses, concepts, themes and graphic, photographic and other visual
  or audio representations; names and descriptions of characters, spells, enchantments, personalities, teams, personas,
  likenesses and special abilities; places, locations, environments, creatures, equipment, magical or supernatural abilities
  or effects, logos, symbols, or graphic designs; and any other trademark or registered trademark clearly identified as
  Product identity by the owner of the Product Identity, and which specifically excludes the Open Game Content; (f )
  ‘Trademark’ means the logos, names, mark, sign, motto, designs that are used by a Contributor to identify itself or its
  products or the associated products contributed to the Open Game License by the Contributor (g) ‘Use’, ‘Used’ or
  ‘Using’ means to use, Distribute, copy, edit, format, modify, translate and otherwise create Derivative Material of Open
  Game Content. (h) ‘You’ or ‘Your’ means the licensee in terms of this agreement.
  2. The License: This License applies to any Open Game Content that contains a notice indicating that the Open Game
  Content may only be Used under and in terms of this License. You must affix such a notice to any Open Game Content
  that you Use. No terms may be added to or subtracted from this License except as described by the License itself. No
  other terms or conditions may be applied to any Open Game Content distributed using this License.
  3. Offer and Acceptance: By Using the Open Game Content You indicate Your acceptance of the terms of this License.
  4. Grant and Consideration: In consideration for agreeing to use this License, the Contributors grant You a perpetual,
  worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive license with the exact terms of this License to Use, the Open Game Content.
  5. Representation of Authority to Contribute: If You are contributing original material as Open Game Content,
  You represent that Your Contributions are Your original creation and/or You have sufficient rights to grant the rights
  conveyed by this License.
  6. Notice of License Copyright: You must update the COPYRIGHT NOTICE portion of this License to include the
  exact text of the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any Open Game Content You are copying, modifying or distributing,
  and You must add the title, the copyright date, and the copyright holder’s name to the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any
  original Open Game Content you Distribute.
  7. Use of Product Identity: You agree not to Use any Product Identity, including as an indication as to compatibility,
  except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of each element of that Product Identity.
  You agree not to indicate compatibility or co-adaptability with any Trademark or Registered Trademark in conjunction
  with a work containing Open Game Content except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with
  the owner of such Trademark or Registered Trademark. The use of any Product Identity in Open Game Content does
  not constitute a challenge to the ownership of that Product Identity. The owner of any Product Identity used in Open
  Game Content shall retain all rights, title and interest in and to that Product Identity.
  8. Identification: If you distribute Open Game Content You must clearly indicate which portions of the work that you
  are distributing are Open Game Content.
  9. Updating the License: Wizards or its designated Agents may publish updated versions of this License. You may use
  any authorised version of this License to copy, modify and distribute any Open Game Content originally distributed
  under any version of this License.
  10. Copy of this License: You MUST include a copy of this License with every copy of the Open Game Content You
  Distribute.
  11. Use of Contributor Credits: You may not market or advertise the Open Game Content using the name of any
  Contributor unless You have written permission from the Contributor to do so.
  12. Inability to Comply: If it is impossible for You to comply with any of the terms of this License with respect to some
  or all of the Open Game Content due to statute, judicial order, or governmental regulation then You may not Use any
  Open Game Material so affected.
  13. Termination: This License will terminate automatically if You fail to comply with all terms herein and fail to cure
  such breach within 30 days of becoming aware of the breach. All sublicenses shall survive the termination of this
  License.
  14. Reformation: If any provision of this License is held to be unenforceable, such provision shall be reformed only to
  the extent necessary to make it enforceable.
  15. COPYRIGHT NOTICE
  Open Game License v 1.0a Copyright 2000, Wizards of the Coast, Inc.
  Legend Core Rulebook, Copyright 2011, Mongoose Publishing Ltd
  Monsters of Legend II, Copyright 2013, Mongoose Publishing Ltd
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)
