arms of

legend

arms of

legend
ARMS OF LEGEND
An adventurer is only as good as his equipment, so the saying goes – and with
this mighty tome, your adventurer will be the best-equipped he can be. From
new weapons and armour, to the more mundane items that keep an adventure
going, Arms of Legend is a complete catalogue that will keep players coming
back for more after every adventure.

MGP 8304

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

US$19.99

ARMS OF

LEGEND
Credits

Contents

Authors

Introduction

Additional Text

Adventuring Gear and Basics 3

Bryan Steele and Lawrence Whitaker
Matthew Sprange, Nick Robinson, Gareth
Hanrahan, August Hahn, Shannon Kavlar,
Joseph Miller, Patrick Younts and Adrian Bott

2

Trading and Quality

38

Armour

48

Weaponry

59

Transport

90

Developer

Richard Ford

Layout and Graphic Design
Will Chapman

Interior Illustrations

Nick Egberts and Lorena Soriano

Proofreading

Beasts and Cohorts

119

Pete Nash, John Hutchinson, Simon Bray,
Jeff Richard and Greg Stafford

Enchantments

138

Playtesting

Alchemy

150

Charlotte Law

Special Thanks

Christopher Morrell, Michael Parkin, James
Lodge, Peter Schofield and Ron Carver

Copyright Information
Arms of Legend ©2012 Mongoose Publishing. All rights reserved. Reproduction of non-Open Game Content
of this work by any means without the written permission of the publisher is expressly forbidden. Legend is
presented under the Open Game Licence. See page 160 for the text of this licence. All text paragraphs and
tables containing game mechanics and statistics derivative of Open Game Content and the System Reference
Document are considered to be Open Game Content. All other significant characters, names, places, items,
art and text herein are copyrighted by Mongoose Publishing. All rights reserved. Printed in USA

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

INTRODUCTION
This expansion for Legend offers a comprehensive guide to all manner of equipment,
armour, weapons and other commodities for use in Legend games. It is complete
with all the characteristics needed for play and includes modifications to the core
rules for special circumstances and other factors that equipment of various types
may offer or impose.
In addition to ‘standard’ equipment, the book also covers Enchantments and Alchemy,
both of which are magical or semi-magical disciplines that have a direct effect on
equipment or rely on it for success.
Some of the items found herein are covered in the Legend Core Rulebook but much
more is on offer besides. This book allows Games Masters and Adventurers access to
a vast array of items for the specific purposes of adventuring and also for use in terms
of background colour and information. Thus, Arms of Legend has much more to offer
than simply being a catalogue of weapons and adventuring essentials.

Culture and Availability
Not every item in this book should be made available to Adventurers. Bear in mind
the cultural and developmental limitations of your chosen campaign and its world.
Black powder weapons, for instance, may have little or no place in your campaign.
Similarly, Adventurers hailing from primitive cultures, or campaigns set in a primitive
world, will have a far lesser range of goods available than those described here. Arms
of Legend is therefore a toolkit for Games Masters to supplement their campaigns,
and a reference for players on what to spend hard-earned or hard-won cash. Games
Masters should be prepared to say No to players who, armed with this book, want
to spend their money on items listed but are clearly restricted. Arms of Legend is a
resource, not an entitlement.

2

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

ADVENTURING GEAR & BASICS
This chapter covers a vast array of items that could be considered the core equipment
for many walks of life, but is primarily focused on the life of a questing Adventurer. The
items themselves might be mundane and simple, but when used in specific ways they
become useful tools.
Also included in this chapter are extended descriptions and uses for the General
Equipment found in Legend, placed and elaborated on here to make this book a ‘onestop’ collection of Legend items currently published.

The Essential Adventuring Kit

The following list represents the Essential Adventurers’ Kit – for when a fast array of
useful equipment is needed and players or their Adventurer do not have the time to
select bespoke items.
The kit, as an inclusive bundle, costs 70 silver and has a total ENC of 17.
Item
2 weeks trail rations
Animal Call/Whistle
Animal Snare/Trap x2
Backpack
Bedroll
Belt
Boots (Common)
Chalk
Cloak (Common)
Crowbar
Flint, steel and tinder
Gloves (Common)
Hammer
Hand Mirror
Pitons (5)
Rope, 10m
Sack (large)
Spare water skin (empty)
String 5m
Torches x2 (6 hours)
Water Flask (full)
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

ENC
1
—
4
1
1
—
—
—
0.5
1
—
0.5
1
—
1
2
1
—
—
2
1

3

Items by Description

Acid, Vial: A simple vial of acid presents a multitude of uses. Acid can quickly eat
through rope, soften up metal, ruin a lock or serve as an impromptu weapon. It can also
be used to inflict damage on individuals or objects (see the Legend Core Rulebook).
Altar, Portable: Designed with the travelling priest in mind, the portable altar is a heavy
polished wood case, properly sanctified by the priest’s religion. Carefully engraved with
the symbols and imagery of the church or cult, the heavy lid opens to reveal a silk-lined
compartment designed to contain a large amount of religious paraphernalia. With a
full stocked portable altar, a priest can hold services anywhere he travels and counts as
a shrine for the purposes of learning Divine Magic.
Altar Shroud: Similar to, but serving an almost opposite purpose from, an altar cloth,
an altar shroud is a large piece of linen or silk hemmed in all four corners to form a
cover for any size of altar. Often inscribed with religious symbols of protection and
warding, these cloth wraps keep the radiance of a consecrated altar bound, preventing
it from being detected magically. Religious ceremonies require that the shroud be
removed, but when not in use, a shroud can protect an altar from unwanted attention.
This item is often used by persecuted religions, allowing them to operate in areas where
they would otherwise be quickly discovered and eliminated.

4

Anatomy Kit: This kit of knives and sharpened flints incorporates only natural materials
and very little metal. The mystical qualities of the items have been cleansed through
intensive rituals and allow an individual to safely extract materials and body parts from
creatures without contaminating them. The Adventurer using this kit receives a +10%
bonus to all Heal Skill Tests made to extract materials from a dead creature.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Animal Call/Whistle: This is a small wooden, bone or even metallic whistle or
instrument used to make attractive sounds in the particular style of animal. Commonly
used by hunters to attract prey, or by scouts to communicate signals to one another in
non-verbal ways, animal calls are seldom larger than a hand’s span in size. Any Adventurer
using an animal call to hunt can add +10% to his Survival skill for hunting purposes.
Animal Snare/Trap: Using a coiled spring or a weight and pulley, the animal snare/trap
is designed to snatch small game animals like hares or pheasant with remarkable force
– possibly killing the animal with the rapidly yanking noose. Placing the trap requires
a successful Survival Skill Test, which will be the opposed number for the Perception
tests of the animal (or anything SIZ 3 or less) that might trigger it. If the animals loses
the test, the snap will spring with an attack skill of 75%, which the animal must Evade
or be held fast. The Hit Location snared will suffer 1D4 damage immediately and then
be held two metres above the ground until released somehow.
Anti-fungal Ointment: One of the greatest hazards of travel in any hot, wet environment
(such as a jungle or a tropical swamp) is fungal infection. There are funguses that grow
like thick orange fur, that explode in long black tubes after gestating for weeks, that
cause the skin to become brittle and blue as it flakes off the bleeding muscles. Various
spells can deal with most of these easily enough. However, a well-prepared Adventurer
brings a supply of ointment with him that prevents these infections in the first place.
Daily application of this preparation gives the Adventurer a +20% bonus to his
Resilience skill when resisting fungal diseases. When purchased a jar of the ointment
has enough material in it to provide protection for 10 days.
Appraisal Kit: An appraisal kit contains a variety of tools for identifying substances,
alloys and methods of manufacture. Using an appraisal kit grants you a +10% bonus
to any Evaluate Skill Test to determine the value of a specific object. The kit contains
enough disposable materials to be useful for 20 Skill Tests.
Ashen Powder: Few city folk have the ability to track effectively, aiding a rogue greatly
in his ability to evade pursuit. Unfortunately, town guards often have animals to help
in this regard. A tenacious pursuit by hunting hounds can tax even the most agile thief.
Ashen powder is a mixture of gem dust and chimney ashes meant to be scattered behind
a running figure. When a creature that tracks by scent comes across a handful of ashen
powder, it must make a Difficult Resilience Test. Failure indicates 1D3 of damage from
the gem dust to the head and loss of any scent related tracking ability until the creature
receives either magical healing or spends three days healing naturally.
Back Travois: This device enables adventurers to more easily carry their fallen comrades
out of hazardous areas so they may receive treatment in a more hospitable location. The
back travois consists of a sturdy leather harness (straps and buckles allow the harness
to fit bipedal creatures from small to large) and a set of jointed wooden poles. The
harness and poles connect together to form a simple triangle that of wood and leather
that can support creatures of size large or smaller. The open end of the triangle rests
across the wearer’s shoulders, while the tip of the triangle drags on the ground behind
– in most cases, the head of the fallen is positioned near the head of the wearer to
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

5

avoid exacerbating any injuries. When wearing a back travois, an Adventurer’s carrying
capacity is doubled and his movement rate is reduced by one-half. An Adventurer can
only transport individuals that are no more than five SIZ larger than himself with a
back travois.
Backpack: This standard piece of adventuring equipment, held to the back with two
shoulder straps, can hold 20 ENC of equipment. There is a more expensive version
that has a reinforced frame, allowing for an additional 5 ENC of equipment to be
strapped to the sides of the backpack as well, costing an additional 2 SP.
Bag of Glass Beads: Bags of glass beads cut like gemstones have few legitimate uses.
They are most commonly used by criminals to dupe the foolhardy into purchasing
their precious gems. Additionally, an Adventurer can drop a real gem into the bag,
shake it up and force someone searching the bag to make a Very Hard Evaluate Skill
Test to spot the real gemstone, although someone with both time (at least one minute
per gem, fake or otherwise) and skill will find it automatically. A bag of glass contains
anywhere between 50 and 100 coloured glass gems of various sizes.
Beads, Prayer: Also known as malas, these smooth, highly-polished beads are strung
together on wires of precious metal and used to count mantras or prayers during
religious ceremonies. Their distinctive clicking becomes greatly magnified during the
performance of a hymn, serving to keep the congregation co-ordinated and focused.
Bedroll: This includes a blanket and cushioned pad, usually carried tightly rolled and
tied with a metre of leather cord. Without a bedroll, sleeping on the open ground does
not count as complete rest for the purposes of healing or recovering from Fatigue. With
1D6 minutes to unroll and lash properly, a bedroll can also be used as a stretcher in an
emergency. More expensive bedrolls made of silks and furs are available for a premium
but offer no special bonuses other than superior comfort and luxury.
Besom: A ceremonial broom, the besom is used to ‘sweep’ negativity and lingering
traces of energy out of a sacred space, cleansing it for a coming ceremony. During a rite,
a besom is sometimes burned after use to negate the darkness it absorbed and banish
whatever might still be lingering behind.
Blackface: This cream paste is darkened through charcoal and sepia ink. Safe to apply
in moderate amounts, blackface dyes the skin of any user jet black for four hours per
application. This colour is extremely helpful for blending in with shadows, adding a
+10% bonus to Stealth Skill Tests when shadows are a prevalent factor. The paste will
survive immersion in water and it is only through rigorous cleaning that it can be
removed prior to its normal four hour lifespan.
Blade Sharpener: This V-shaped wooden handle is inset with abrasive stones angled
specifically to give a blade an extremely sharp edge with practically no training on how
to use it but repeated uses can make the temper on the blade brittle and easily blunted.
Using the blade sharpener on any sort of non-iron bladed weapon (it has no effect on
iron weaponry) for one hour restores one Hit Point to the weapon.

6

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Blessed Food: Many rituals and ceremonies require the participants to share in a
meal. Largely symbolic, these meals mark an important point in religious services,
often calling down the blessings of the divine upon those who partake of this specially
prepared and blessed food. The exact form of blessed food relies largely on the religion
in question.
Block and Tackle: This is a mechanism of pulleys and counterweights useful for
constructing traps, hauling up heavy items and so forth. It adds a +10% bonus to
Mechanisms tests to make or disarm large traps and is required for some Engineering
tests. If used in conjunction with a looped bottom for a climber’s foot, Athletics tests
for climbing are also at +10%. A Block and Tackle requires at least 10 metres of rope to
function and 10 minutes to set up and take down properly.
Blood Decoy: In the waterways of the world there lurk a thousand dangers, each more
terrible than the last. Fortunately the majority of these dangers are not malicious.
They simply feed on whatever happens to be available. Intelligent travellers realise
this and come prepared with blood decoys. Each decoy is a vaguely fist shaped object
made of hard jelly. They smell a great deal like dried blood. When thrown into water
(preferably far away from the area the traveller intends to cross) the decoy expands to
several times its original size and gives off the unmistakable smell of blood. This lures
the predators away from the travellers crossing point for 2D4 minutes.
Body Sled: Measuring around two metres long, this sled can hold a creature of up to
large size. Designed for pulling captured quarry, many use it instead to assist fallen
comrades. The body sled increases the amount of ENC an Adventurer can carry
without penalty by half, with any additional ENC above his normal maximum placed
on the sled. If pulled over snow, the dragging load is doubled.
Bottle, Glass: A blown bottle of clear or opaque glass, with stopper (cork or wood),
that holds a litre of liquid.
Branding Iron: For use with cattle, horses or slaves, the branding iron can be forged
to apply a letter, symbol or family crest. Just heat and burn.
Breath Bag: This thin air-filled bladder contains enough air to double the amount
of time an Adventurer can stay underwater before he begins to drown. This item is
particularly popular in underground and island settings, where the extra air can mean
the difference between life and death.
Bull-roarer: A musical wind instrument on the end of a long cord, a bull-roarer is played
by spinning the instrument overhead quickly. The air passing through the weighed end
creates a low, droning sound believed to be both attractive to good spirits and repulsive
to bad ones. Some belief systems make a distinction between which direction a bullroarer should be swung, with its effects reversing if used the wrong way.
Candle, X Hour: From the small, stubby candle that will burn for one hour to the
metre long illumination votive used in cathedrals and temples, candles are a useful
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

7

source of light that can be used nearly anywhere. Originally used by miners to mark
the passage of time while underground, many Adventurers have adopted them for the
same purpose. They are inexpensive and useful, as a candle illuminates a one metre
radius when lit. Any wind stronger than a slight breeze will undoubtedly extinguish
any candle.
Candle, Religious: A powerfully scented incense candle used in rituals and religious
services all over civilisation, the powerful calming odour of the white smoke it gives off
is said to help religious types find their centres and commune with their spiritual sides.
Anyone of a specific religion who sits within one metre of a burning religious candle
bought specifically for their faith regains one Magic Point every hour. The religious
candle burns for six hours effectively, but due to the concentration of the scented oils
in its creation, only 1D6 of them will possibly benefit the nearby faithful.
Candle Snuff: A candle snuff resembles a clapperless bell on a long metal arm. Used
to quench candles during a ceremony, the candle snuff exists because many spirits are
believed to take offence at flames being put out with a person’s breath. It is also used
in households where candles are lit out of reach and so require a toll to reach them in
order to put them out.
Candlemaking Kit: Good or evil, holy or profane, the shrines and temples of almost
any deity can be noted by the large number of candles that burn within its confines.
Whether as a symbol of hope, an accent on an altar top or simply for illumination,
churches consume a considerable number of candles. A candlemaking kit is a must for
any large temple, providing all the wicks, tallow or wax, and other accessories needed
to produce 500 hours worth of candles before needing to be replaced.
Cards: Cards are a more elaborate form of game of chance, readily available only in
cultures that have some form of printing press technology (mundane or magical).
Otherwise cards are for officers, gentlemen and the nobility. Typically made on a thick
rag paper cards have a single blank or patterned side and a painted side showing a value
and some sort of traditional motif.
Chain: This is stout metal chain made of finger-wide links that can be used for countless
different activities. It has an 4 AP and 8 HP per link, applying a –30% penalty to any
Brawn Skill Tests to break. If used as a weapon, it inflicts 1D6 damage.
Chalice: A large cup, usually fashioned of a precious metal, which is used to offer wine,
blood, water, or other fluids to the gods during the performance of a hymn. When the
hymn is completed, the congregation is often offered a drink from the chalice to seal
their communion with their god.
Chalk: A five centimetre length of white chalk, used for either marking or, with the
use of a small grater (included in the cost), for filing into dust that can be scattered
or tossed over other items, hands and so on to absorb moisture or highlight things
difficult to otherwise see.

8

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Clay and Wax Box: Usually stored in a small iron case, this box consists of a pair of
soft wax plates and a packet of fast hardening clay. To use a clay and wax box, a key is
placed between the plates and the case is closed. When opened again, an imprint of
both sides of the key remains behind. When clay is poured through a small hole in one
side of the case, a false key is created. This clay key is crude, fragile, and only usable
once, but it provides a +10% bonus to an Mechanisms Skill Tests made trying to open
a lock the original key would open.
Climbing Kit: This sack of tools consists of a leather harness, several short lengths of
rope, pitons and a variety of other specific utensils. The climbing kit provides a bonus
of +20% to any Athletics Skill Tests made to climb, but requires 2D6 minutes to don
properly.
Codex: This is a bound volume of 100 papyrus or parchment sheets. The price is for
a blank codex; codices containing sage lore or runic spells are considerably pricier. Any
sort of codex that contains enough information to be considered ‘Research’ for a skill’s
Improvement Roll will easily cost five times the listed amount.
Compass: Loadstone is a naturally occurring magnet that points towards the north
when allowed to swing freely. A compass works by suspending a needle of loadstone in
oil. This oil is sealed in a metal cylinder with a glass face. The user sits the compass on
the ground. A few (1D4) rounds later the needle swings towards true north. Using a
compass gives you a +30% bonus to any Skill tests made to determine direction.
Craft Tools: This is a catch-all category for small satchels or cases containing portable
tools appropriate to a particular Craft skill. These tools are often the bare minimum
required to practise a craft without a skill penalty. A set of craft tools is useful for only
one craft, which is specified upon purchase. An Adventurer must buy more sets of tools
for any additional crafts he may wish to perform.
Crowbar: This forged piece of angled metal adds +10% to Brawn Skill Tests to lever
open doors, casket lids and the like. Objects not meant to be forcibly opened in this
manner will suffer 1D6 damage. Also usable as a weapon, a crowbar is considered a
club (wielded with a –10% penalty) with the ability to impale upon a critical hit.
Crutches: Basically wooden poles with padded cups to go under the arms, crutches
are designed to allow those with hurt or missing legs to keep a semblance of mobility.
Using crutches requires a single Athletics Skill Test (+25%) but allows an Adventurer to
move at up to half his normal rate with any amount of injury to one of his legs.
Dice Set: A common diversion for many common folk after a hard day’s work, there
are innumerable games of chance that may be played with dice.
Doorjamb: This wedge of serrated metal is roughly the length of a man’s hand, with
very rough rasps up and down two of its sides. It is used under a wooden door to keep
it from opening. It takes two Combat Actions to place and hammer a doorjamb into
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

9

place, but when it has bitten into the door and gripped the floor, it makes the door
immobile without an Athletics roll pull the door open (with a –10% penalty).
Dowsing Rods: This split stick made of specially treated wood and is used to find
deposits of water or other hidden items. A dowsing rod can be used to help cast
Common Magic spells, an Adventurer will gain a +10% bonus to his skill for casting
Detect spells, as the rod focuses his magical energy. There are as many different types
of dowsing rods as Detect spells, each will only provide the bonus for one of them.
Dye, Coloured: Used for colouring clothing, hair or even skin, dye comes in a thick
paste that must be spooned into a water-vinegar mix to dilute properly. Any object
allowed to dry for 12 hours or so after soaking will take on the colour of the dye. If used
on skin or hair, dye takes 1D6 weeks to lighten and eventually fade. Although dyes are
available in an array of colours, the most common varieties are indigo blue, grape red
and ivory yellow.
Elven Bowstring: Made from the woven silk of treetop moths mixed with the sap
resins of a dozen different trees found in many elven forests, these especially strong
bowstrings are uncommonly quiet when released and remain slightly tacky to better
hold an arrow in place while firing. An elven bowstring has a 75% chance of ignoring
any form of physical damage from mundane sources, and adds +10 metres to the range
of any Bow attacks.
Erasing Broom: An erasing broom is a section of feathered wicker or straw bound with
cord around a short wooden handle. An erasing broom can impose a –10% penalty to
anyone attempting to visually Track the user. An erasing broom is too light and fragile
to be an effective weapon.
Everyday Tonic: This mixture of vitamins, minerals and other substances tastes foul
but is said to add years to one’s life and keep the body fit and vigorous through the
wonders of its unique blend of health-inducing sources. So long as the Adventurer
wakes up to a spoonful of Everyday Tonic he actually only needs six hours of rest to
be considered to have had a full night’s sleep. Also, he can add +10% to his Resilience
skill to avoid catching any sort of mundane illnesses. These effects are only good for 24
hours. Each bottle contains roughly thirty spoonfuls of tonic.
Explosive Egg: An explosive egg is a unique espionage tool used to distract and frighten
pursuers. Although its most famous users are the mysterious assassins known as the
ninja, it has also seen use by several other lesser known organisations. An explosive egg
is a hollowed out eggshell filled with a pinch of black powder and a handful of flour or
dust. A thin square of paper is placed over the hole in the egg, with shell and paper held
fast together by a gum made of sticky, smeared rice. To discharge an explosive egg, the
user simply throws it, whereupon it explodes. When the egg breaks, the black powder
explodes in a flash and flour fills the air in a thick cloud. Anyone within three metres of
the egg must make an Evade Skill Test. If they succeed, they have successfully averted
their eyes. If they fail the test, the combination of the explosive flash and the flour in
the air blinds them for one Combat Round. The flour cloud disperses after 1d4 rounds.

10

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

While the cloud remains, anyone within its three metre radius suffers a –10% penalty
to all Perception Skill Tests.
An explosive egg is very delicate. An Adventurer carrying an explosive egg who is
struck in melee combat or affected by an area effect damaging spell risks having the
egg explode prematurely. Each time he is struck by a melee weapon, there is a 20%
chance that the egg detonates. If it does, he and all Adventurers within three metres
must immediately attempt an Evade Skill Test as detailed previously. The owner of the
egg suffers a –10% penalty to his Skill Test.
Fairy Dust: Not created from actual fey creatures, fairy dust is made from ground
crystals and herbal ingredients. Fairy dust is used during rites that draw upon the spirit
plane. Some shamans also sprinkle fairy dust over projects to call upon the powers of
inspiration and creativity. A shaman who uses fairy dust gains a +10% bonus to all Skill
Tests relating to Spirit Magic.
False Face Kit: This item is normally used on stage in more civilised areas, allowing
the user to quickly change disguises during pauses in a play or production. The speed
and efficiency of a false faces kit can be used by the less scrupulous for a rapid identity
change on the run. Consisting of disguises stored in protective sections of a slender
wooden case, the false face kit only provides three different facial disguises but each can
be applied in only 1D3 minutes. Because the disguise is only to the user’s face, relying
on it alone penalizes any Disguise Skill Test by –10%.
Familiar’s Pack: A way for familiars and animal companions to travel in style, this pack
is crafted to provide comfort and protection for its occupant. Food pouches, a bladder
for water, and removable, washable bedding and litter collection are all amenities the
familiar’s pack offers. If the familiar is subject to any attack that must pass through the
pack to affect it, but gains a +50% bonus to any Evade Skill Test (normally the pack is far
larger than the animal it contains and hitting the creature within can prove difficult). The
familiar also benefits from the reinforced leather protecting it, giving it 3 AP in addition
to any AP it may already have.
Figurine: Many soldiers and artists make simple figurines of wood or stone. These
keepsakes resemble good friends, comrades lost in battle, or other subjects that the
buyer finds dear. Some are of more graphic nature, depicting well-known camp
followers, enemies carved up in the heat of battle and other similar topics.
Fins: Many costal people fit simple leather fins to their feet to enhance their ability
to swim. These fins give the wearer a +10% bonus to Swim Skill Tests while worn but
only if the Adventurer wearing them is unencumbered. Putting on fins takes two full
rounds; one to remove your boots/shoes and another to fit the fins on. Wearing fins on
land reduces your land speed by half.
Fire Seed: Most experienced travellers do not try to restart their fire every night. Instead
they carry a ceramic container called a fire seed, which contains several small holes to
allow oxygen to fuel the fire. This container holds a single coal from the fire the night
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

11

before. A fire seed can protect an ember for up to three days, but cannot withstand
immersion of any sort. Even attempting the average water crossing with a fire seed can
(if sufficiently damp) put the seed out. Starting a fire with a fire seed is much easier
than with any of the more usual methods, giving the user a +10% bonus to any Skill
Test required to start or maintain a fire.
Fire Wheel: A small wooden disc with painted parchment tubes attached at radially
opposite points, fire wheels are filled with black powder. When the powder tubes are
ignited, they spew flames from one end, causing the disc to spin wildly and generate
a high-pitched whistle. From a ceremonial standpoint, fire wheels are used to drive off
negative influences and evil creatures who, theoretically, cannot stand the light and noise.
First Aid Kit: Some first aid kits are made up primarily of bandages, tourniquets and
herbal compresses. Others contain jars of leeches and maggots. Many contain salt sticks
and fish oils for cleaning and sanitising. Whatever the composition, a first aid kit allows
the owner to use the First Aid skill without penalty. A first aid kit is good for five uses
(whether the Skill Test succeeds or fails) before it is used up. In some instances, first aid
kits can be replenished after each use for 4 SP.
Fish Hook: This is a small metal hook, sometimes barbed, which is used to catch fish.
This item allows an Adventurer to use his Survival skill to catch a fish without suffering
a penalty on the test. It does require some form of string, twine or rope to function.
Fishing Kit: A boxed container consisting of 12 hooks, 10 metres of thin but strong
line, a segmented rod and six corks, the fishing kit grants an Adventurer a +20% bonus
to his Survival test to catch fish. The fishing kit is equipped to catch smaller fish of SIZ
2 or less, but for every extra 10 SP spent adds 1 ENC to the kit but doubles the SIZ of
fish that it can effectively handle.
Flare Paste: Flare paste is a heavy black slightly sticky substance that comes in a thick
glass jar. The jar contains enough of the paste to cover a three metre by three metre
area. When ignited the paste burns for two rounds, doing 1d4 damage per round
to any location touching it. The paste burns bright white and ignites any flammable
materials that touch it while it burns.
Flash Powder: This item is a small packet of gunpowder that produces a bright and
smoky, but otherwise harmless, explosion when detonated. After using flash powder,
an Adventurer may immediately attempt a Stealth Skill Test without penalty. The
light and smoke from the flash powder distracts opponents, giving the Adventurer
opportunity to use his skill.

12

Flint and Tinder: The fastest and easiest way to start a fire without a hand-striker,
an Adventurer with flint and tinder can build a fire in one minute under common
conditions without having to roll his Survival skill. Games Masters may wish to impose
penalties if the Adventurer is attempting to start a fire in a high wind, driving rain or
without the best fire-making kindling/wood.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Folding Stool: This cunning contraption uses canvas and several hinged metal legs to
create a stable backless seat that can be easily folded up and packed. For an army on the
move such a device is a luxury – seats are in short supply in a mobile army camp.
Font, Great: In a shrine or temple, a font is a sacred fountain or pool that holds
blessed water. During religious ceremonies, the water is often used to douse items or
the faithful in the hopes of washing away impurities. A great font measures at least
three metres by three metres and is usually deep enough to bathe in. In extremely large
temples, it may even be deep enough to swim in or immerse animals like horses. Great
fonts are used for extremely special rituals, ones that involve dozens or hundreds of
participants who must receive the blessing that its depths can provide.
Font, Portable: On the other end of the size scale from the great font is the portable
font. Rarely larger than a soup tureen, portable fonts offer the ceremonial benefits of a
font for small shrines and private gatherings.
Footpads: Small sheets of layered fur and silk lashed under the user’s existing shoes or
boots, footpads reduce the noise footfalls make by a remarkable margin. Although the
items are heavier than they look, reducing the wearer’s movement by one metre per
movement, they are exceptionally quiet and add +10% to Stealth for silent movement
purposes.
Glass Cutter: Only the very richest, and thus most successful, thieves will aspire
to owning one of these wondrous devices. Padded with sound absorbing cloth, the
wooden cone of the glass cutter conceals a diamond-tipped scoring blade wound by a
handle. When placed against glass, a rogue merely need turn the handle, gently scoring
the glass until a complete circular hole is cut, wide enough to allow the passage of arm
and hand to snatch valuables or unlock windows. By placing gum on the surface of the
wooden cone, a thief can ensure the that the cut glass does not accidentally slip from
the cutter and break. The glass cutter is silent in use and requires an Adventurer to
spend 1D6 Combat Rounds operating it to break through any glass surface no more
than a quarter of an inch thick. A Mechanisms Skill Test is then made to determine
whether the cut glass slips from the cutter and breaks, thus creating noise. The use of
gum will cause this check to automatically succeed.
Glass, Reflecting: A small mirrored piece of glass roughly the size of a man’s fist
attached to a small handle, the reflecting glass can be used as a normal mirror in all
ways but is designed to reflect around corners or over ledges. Using the glass requires
a Perception Skill Test at –5% but allows the Adventurer to see in places he otherwise
would not without risking his own head by looking.
Grappling Hook: When tied to a rope, this angled piece of wrought metal can be
lofted onto a battlement or similar ledge with a Throwing test. It will support the
weight of 50 ENC or 50 SIZ, or any combination thereof at any given time, and
requires a Brawn Skill Test (with a penalty equal to the ENC or SIZ on the rope at
the time) to dislodge while in use. If used as a weapon, the grappling hook should be
considered a club (with a –15% penalty).
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

13

Grappling Hook, Assassin’s: Designed for quiet use by a single person, this small
angled piece of strong metal can be lofted onto a battlement or similar ledge with either
a Throwing or Ranged Combat Weapon (if fired from a bow or crossbow) test. It will
support the weight of 20 ENC or 20 SIZ, or any combination thereof at any given
time, and requires a Brawn Skill Test (with a penalty equal to the ENC or SIZ on the
rope at the time) to dislodge while in use.
Grindstone: Far superior to the labour-intensive whetstone, this mechanical device can
return a decent cutting edge or thrusting point to the dullest of weapons. A whetstone
may require over an hour’s work to sharpen the average sword – this grindstone can
complete the task in a quarter of the time. A slashing or piercing weapon that is not
kept in good order through the use of a whetstone or grindstone will gradually become
duller, losing its edge or point. A –1 penalty to damage rolls will be incurred for every
month the weapon is not sharpened.
Hammer: Useful in a variety of capacities, a hammer is a tool no Adventurer should
be without. If used as a weapon, it is treated as a club (wielded with a –10% penalty).
Hammers may be used on inanimate objects without suffering damage in return, as
they are designed to be used this way. Some hammers also have a sharp or wedge-like
end to their heads, allowing them to be used as wedges or picks as well, but cost an
additional 1 SP.
Hand-striker: A curled handle of metal with a tiny inset piece of flint attached by a
spring, the hand-striker is a fancy version of the flint and tinder (see above) wrapped up

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

into a one-handed mechanism. It takes only 1D3 Combat Actions to make a sufficient
spark with a hand-striker, but the pieces of flint must be replaced periodically or they
become too ground and flat to spark. Replacement flints are 4 CP each.
Handpouch: The best friend of pickpockets and shoplifters, a handpouch is a deep
leather sleeve lashed to the underside of a thief ’s wrist with an opening at the heel of
the hand. With practice a thief can become very adept at tucking small items into the
opening and then moving the arm to deposit the item deep within the sleeve. Although
this item does grant a +10% to all Sleight Skill Tests dealing with that hand and small
enough items (coins, gems and so on), it does not silence them – so coin-nabbing
thieves should be aware they will jingle if the handpouch gets too full.
Healer’s Kit: A leather satchel stocked with bandages, mortar and pestle, poultices,
barber’s tools, basic surgical equipment and everything else a healer might need to
practise his trade on the road, a healer’s kit is necessary for an Adventurer to use the
Healing skill. Unlike first aid kits, which have a set number of uses, a healer’s kit is more
or less inexhaustible until a Games Master believes it is time to replace it.
Horn, Hunting: Sounding a hunting horn signals allies or strikes fear in the heart of
enemies. When this large horn is blown in the open wilderness, all creatures within a
kilometre will hear its call. Those further away will hear it with a successful routine
Perception Skill Test with the difficulty increasing by one factor for every additional
kilometre beyond the first.
Horn, Speaking: Similar to a listening cone but in reverse, the speaking horn is a
simple wood or leather cone designed to amplify an Adventurer’s voice. An Adventurer
using a speaking horn will be clearly heard up to a number of metres equal to his CON
x10.
Horse Nails: A rogue on foot is easily caught by enemies on horseback. Easily caught,
that is, unless the rogue throws down these specialised caltrops while he is running.
Large enough to be avoided by man-sized or smaller creatures, horse nails are designed
to drive a long, thin spike up into the foot of any heavy being that steps on it. A
single bag of horse nails will adequately cover a three by three metre area. Unless the
victim makes a Simple Evade Test, horse nails inflict two points of damage to a creature
running through them and reduce speed by half until any injury is healed.
Hourglass: This specially blown tube of curved glass set into a wooden or brass frame
is filled with fine sand that takes exactly an hour’s time to pass through. Fragile and
easily disturbed, the hourglass is an important piece of equipment for alchemists, who
need to keep track of reaction and application times for future notation and possible
adjustments.
Howler: A specially carved sphere of bone or wood tied to a length of rope or light
chain, the howler makes a terribly loud and haunting wail like that of a great beast
when twirled rapidly around the head. Used as a long-distance signal to groups of
allied soldiers or scouts, the sound can be heard for five kilometres on a clear day. Also,
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

15

the howling sound a howler emits will often keep most small predators and primitive
humanoids from approaching the area without sufficient Persistence tests. Larger and
more territorial predators, however, might believe a rival has challenged them and
come to investigate.
Icepick: A very narrow blade, usually edgeless and tapering to an extremely sharp
point, mounted in a hiltless handle of wood or metal, an icepick is an effective tool
in an emergency, doubling as an etching tool in adverse conditions for engraving.
Due to their unwieldy nature, any activity taken with an icepick suffers a –5% skill
penalty (unless, of course, that activity involves picking at ice).
Icon: An icon is a form of religious imagery, usually crafted as a statue. Icons come
in many different forms and sizes, from tiny statuary that can be carried in a priest’s
pocket to massive glass windows that dominate an entire cathedral.
Insect Netting: Those wishing to avoid the side effects of insect repellent may find this
netting beneficial when they camp in swamps and other havens of small vermin. This
silk netting can cover a single man-sized creature with ease and will protect against all
biting and stinging insects.
Insect Repellent: By liberally coating exposed flesh, an Adventurer can protect himself
from most biting and stinging insects. Stinging vermin must succeed a Persistence
Skill Test to approach within three metres of an Adventurer using insect repellent.
Unfortunately, insect repellent has a similar affect against other creatures, conferring
a –10% penalty to all Charisma-based Skill Tests relying upon interaction such as
Influence or Seduction.
Jacks: An evolution of the scatter sticks game jacks are twisted pieces of metal vaguely
resembling caltrops. They come in sets of 20 with a single reasonably elastic ball. The
goal is to bounce the ball and collect as many jacks as possible and still catch the ball
before it hits the ground. Endless hours (and quite a bit of coin) can be spent playing
jacks.
Jailbreak Tools: A specialized set of thieves’ tools designed to deal with jail cell bars
and heavy masonry, a rogue equipped with these can create enough of a hole in a stone
wall or a metal door to attempt an escape in just 30 minutes. In circumstances where
a rogue cannot access a lock to open, jailbreak tools allow at least a chance of egress.
The tools give a +10% bonus to any Mechanisms or Brawn Skill Tests undertaken in
the attempt to escape.
Knockout Powder, Vial: This powder is made from a combination of chemicals that
cause the inhaler to lose consciousness. Typically the powder is held in a small vial
that is opened when the Adventurer wishes to use it and whipped into the face of the
opponent. To deliver the knockout powder the Adventurer must make a successful
unarmed attack. If successful the opponent must make a Difficult Resilience Skill Test
or fall unconscious for 1d4 minutes.

16

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Ladder, 3 metre: A lashed or bolted wooden ladder used to climb flat surfaces can be
used to ignore any penalties to Athletics climbing tests due to the nature of the surface.
It can hold up to 60 ENC at any given time.
Ladder, Grappling: This is a five metre rope ladder tipped with a pair of small bronze
grappling hooks. A small tension wire allows for the hooks to be thrown as if they were
grappling hooks (see above) using the Throwing skill. The rope ladder can hold up to
25 ENC of weight before slipping its grip or rungs.
Lantern, Basic: Most lanterns are made of brass or bone and use a leather or metal flap
to shield the oiled or waxen mantle inside. A basic lantern provides clear illumination
for a three metre radius. It will burn for two hours on a flask of oil.
Lantern, Cowled: A cowled lantern is a smaller lantern that is always made from bronze
and brass with a stiff leather hood that pulls back from its one main opening. Inside the
cowled lantern is a ring of polished mirrors that reflect the light of the burning oil into a
focused beam that comes out of the opening when the hood is pulled back. The beam of
light from a cowled lantern extends 10 metres, but is only one metre wide. It will burn for
one hour on a flask of oil.
Lantern, Hanging: An extremely delicate and decorative lantern made of coloured
paper and thin wood, a hanging lantern is used to cast a dim but pleasing glow to a
large area. The coloured light from a hanging lantern provides hazy illumination up to
a four metre radius. It will burn for three hours on a flask of oil.
Listening Cone: A simple but highly useful device, this is a hollow cone made of wood
or paper, though some may also be constructed out of shell. When placed against a door
or wall, the listening cone amplifies muffled sounds, allowing a rogue to eavesdrop on
conversations he may otherwise to be privy to. A listening cone grants a +5% bonus to
all Perception Skill Tests made listening through doors and walls.
Lock Picks: An item no self-respecting thief would ever be without, a set of lock picks
allows an Adventurer to use his Mechanical skill to pick a lock. The Games Master may
assign penalties or bonuses to this test based upon the specific circumstances.
Magnifying Lens: Whether mounted on a handle or in a pair of wire frames to be
worn as spectacles, this specifically shaped piece of ground glass is used to magnify
writing, symbols or other tiny clues. While looking through the lens at anything within
a distance of one metre, the Adventurer gets a +25% bonus to Perception. However,
he suffers a –15% penalty to Perception tests concerning everywhere else. Also, a
magnifying lens held still and fed sufficient light from the sun or other remarkable
source can create a heat source that can ignite flammable objects.
Marbles: This bag of a 100 or so marbles can provide a different, and sometimes
amusing, alternative to cruel caltrops. One bag of marbles will cover a three metre

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

17

square area. Any Adventurer moving into this area at more than a quarter of their base
speed must make a Routine Evade Skill Test or immediately fall prone. Those running
or charging into the area must make a Hard Evade Skill Test.
Milling Stones: This is a hand-held pair of grinding stones that can be loaded with spices,
grains and minerals to be turned to powder. Milling stones are helpful for alchemists,
healers, shamans and magicians to have a source for their various and sundry ingredients
while on the road. The grinding process takes less than a few minutes for most substances,
but could take hours for gemstones or other extremely hard materials.
Mining Pick: A cross between a spade and a mattock, a mining pick allows its user to
chip his way through rock (albeit quite slowly). If used as a weapon, it is considered a
club (wielded with a –10% penalty). Mining picks may be used on inanimate objects
without being destroyed.
Musical Instrument: A musical instrument of basic quality such as a lute, small harp,
drum, and so on. Small musical instruments such as simple pipes and recorders cost
approximately a quarter of the price and have no ENC.
Net, Fishing: This a two metre by two metre weighted net of woven fibres designed
to be dropped into standing or running water to catch fish, crustaceans and the like,
for food. It takes 3D10 minutes to use the net properly, but adds a +25% bonus to the
Adventurer’s Survival skill for the purposes of catching food in this way.
Net, Handled: A fine, mesh netting mounted on a wooden hoop set with a long
handle, this net is designed to capture tiny creatures such as butterflies, rats and other
pests. Use of a handled net counts as its own Combat Style with DEX x2 as the basic
skill percentage. It may only be used against creatures of SIZ 1.
Noble Seal: Often built into a fine piece of jewellery, an expensive handle or chain
necklace, every noble line has some form of crest that can be carved in reverse into a
signet seal. These seals can be used to press waxen drops to close letters, scrolls or other
similar objects. Recognising a specific noble family or bloodline by its seal requires a
Lore (World) Skill Test (modified as the Games Master sees fit). Also, anything that has
been sealed in this way can only be opened by breaking the seal unless arcane methods
are used.
Oar, Collapsible: A hinged piece of metal with a wide wooden end that snaps open to
a half-metre length, the collapsible oar gives a +5% to Boating due to its lightweight
and expertly crafted design. When used in combat, the collapsible oar acts as a club
(with a –10% penalty).
Oil, Flask: A single flask of oil is enough to fuel a basic lantern for two hours, or, if
broken on the ground and ignited, enough to sustain a small fire for one minute. Oil
is packaged in small pottery containers or glass bottles, but can also occasionally be
found in waxed leather skins. A skin cannot be ‘broken’ as mentioned above – either
on purpose or accidentally.

18

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Oil, Jellied: Mixing sawdust, chalk or hoof shavings into common lamp oil slowly
over a period of time can eventually create a combustible jelly that is very useful for
smearing on torches and other objects that are to be set alight at a later time. A single
spark will light jellied oil on fire, and it will then burn as if it were a common flask of
oil. After it has been smeared onto something, jellied oil stays combustible for up to a
week before it begins to lose its potency.
Oil, Weapon: Used to keep rust and tarnish off the precious edges of bladed weapons,
weapon oil is extremely thin and is made primarily from the rendered fat and oils
from fish or whales. It is relatively odourless and carries with it only a very slight
yellowish tint. It is only slightly more flammable than cooking oils, and a single
bottle of it can upkeep dozens of weapons for weeks at a time. Any blade treated
with weapon oil after it has been used in combat will not suffer from mundane rust
or tarnish for a week or so.
Offering Bowl: Decorated with religious symbols, offering bowls serve a vital function
during ceremonies by providing a receptacle for gifts made directly to the deity itself.
Small samples of ritual food and drink are sometimes placed in offering bowls as a
symbol of feeding them directly to the divine. Other times, wealth is placed within
them as a way of supplicating worshipped beings for their blessing. After a ceremony,
anything in a collection bowl is burned as a sign of divine acceptance.
Papyrus Sheet: A papyrus sheet is a sheet of thin, brittle paper useful for taking notes,
drawing maps or even making a rubbing of a raised surface. It is painstakingly made
from papyrus reeds and is considered a luxury item by most common people. A sheet
of papyrus is square, half a metre by half a metre. Once written on, a papyrus sheet can
be ‘waxed’ to make the ink water resistant and smear-proof, though this also makes the
sheet more flammable should it ever be exposed to an open flame.
Parasol: Used by circus performers as a balance aid, parasols are surprisingly effective
in this role. Small umbrellas weighted around their edges to provide a counterweight,
parasols are often made of resistant materials that can function admirably as small
shields. While they do occupy one hand, parasols add a +10% bonus to Acrobatics
Skill Tests.
Pendulum: An ornate weight depending from a length of chain or rope, the pendulum
is most often fastened to the ceiling of the sanctuary. During a hymn, a priest sets the
pendulum swinging as a way to help the congregation enter a meditative or trance
state.
Pepper: The black gold of the world, pepper is a small dried fruit coming from a
vine. It has a very pungent flavour, capable of disguising even the most dreadful tastes
and smells. Heavy peppering of food provided anyone who tastes or smells the food
a –20% penalty on any roll to detect a single flavour (like a poison or potion) in the
food. If spread to cover a trail Pepper also causes any animals tracking by scent to
suffer a 50% penalty to their Track skill.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

19

Poison Antidote Kit: This addition to a standard healer’s kit allows an Adventurer to
treat poisons with greater efficiency. Each kit contains enough supplies to deal with ten
poisoning cases, after which the healer will need to restock. When using this kit, the
Adventurer receives a +20% bonus to any Healing Skill Tests made while treating an
Adventurer suffering from poison damage.
Pole, 3 Metre: This item serves many useful purposes, from testing the stability of the
ground ahead, knocking unreachable objects down to awaiting hands, to functioning
as a crude yoke over an Adventurer’s shoulders. The pole is not built for combat, but
could be used as an unwieldy staff (with a –10% penalty) if necessary.
Pottery Wheel: A large wooden device with a swinging plank tethered to a spinning
table surface, the pottery wheel not only allows for faster uses of the Craft (Pottery)
skill, but grants a +10% bonus as well. A pottery wheel is unlikely to be very mobile,
and is often placed in a potter’s workshop or artisan’s room.
Preservative Fluid: This alchemical concoction is useful for preserving organic tissue
for long periods of time. A litre of the fluid can be used to preserve a kilogram of
flesh, organ or a small creature for a year, after which it will be necessary to drain the
preservative fluid and replace it with a fresh solution.
Preserving Kit: A preserving kit includes salt, a variety of sheets of varying layers, a
tool for creating sawdust, jars and other assorted preserving supplies. Using it provides
the tools needed for any Skill Test involving the preservation and long-term storage of
food. The kit is good for 10 uses.
Quenching Blanket: This is a thick, twin-layered woollen blanket interwoven with
pockets of bone-chips and other fire resistant materials, sewn in with weighted edges.
It can be tossed with a Throwing action onto any non-magical fire up to two metres in
diameter, which it will smother in 2D3 Combat Rounds. If the blanket has not put the
fire out in that time, it is likely the blanket has caught fire.
Quick Sheath: This is a common sword or other straight-bladed weapon’s sheath with
an additional clasp and brass mechanism at the top. Using spring tension, the quick
sheath partially ejects a weapon for faster drawing. Held in place by a small metal clasp
that can be thumbed open, the Adventurer that uses a quick sheath adds +1 to his
Strike Rank at the beginning of any combat in which his weapon is already sheathed.
Because of the spring and clasp, it takes two Combat Actions to replace a weapon in
the quick sheath.
Quick Sheath, Wrist: Basically a smaller version of the normal quick sheath, but
strapped to the forearm of the user, the wrist quick sheath can only hold straightbladed items of less than one ENC. In addition to the bonuses of a normal quick
sheath, this version allows the wearer to draw this weapon with the flick of his wrist –
which is considered automatic, does not cost an action and does not provoke Combat
Reactions. Also, it offers +10% to any Sleight Skill Tests to hide the sheath’s weapon.

20

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Quiver: A very basic item used to carry ammunition for bows and crossbows, a quiver
can generally hold up to 30 arrows or crossbow bolts. Quivers are commonly cylindrical
in shape with some kind of shoulder or belt strap to hold them fast to the wearer. Some
come with detachable lids or covers in order to keep fletching dry in bad weather, but
these versions take an extra Combat Action to open if the wearer is caught unawares.
Rangeglass: A spyglass with a long sighting bar hinged to one side, a rangeglass
requires 14 Intelligence to use effectively. By noting shadows along the sighting bar
and performing a set of calculations, the user of a rangeglass can calculate the exact
distance to a viewed object. Rangeglasses do not make objects appear any closer and
require natural sunlight or moonlight to work.
Razor, Folding: The mainstay of any barber’s tools, the folding razor is the best
implement to painstakingly remove three-day old stubble before a noble’s ball or shear
through a piece of cloth or rope in a hurry. Useful in a variety of ways, the razor can
also be used to inflict rather nasty wounds on bare flesh – inflicting 1D3 damage upon
scoring a hit on an unarmoured Hit Location. Armour of any kind stops this damage
completely and dulls the blade considerably. Apart from the damage, a folding razor
has the same statistics as a dagger.
Relic Case: This heavy case is lined with numerous straps and cushions that can be
used to safely transport relics from one location to another. While the case was designed
specifically for relics, any other item placed within will be safe from breakage unless the
case itself is destroyed. The wide variety of buckles and different cushion sizes allows
any item of up to one metre in length and half that in width to be secured within.
Relic, False: It is an unfortunate truth that some merchants will do anything to make
a living, even sell replicas of religious relics while claiming them to be authentic. False
relics are usually only seen in small, rural villages with no direct representatives of the
religions involved, as a true priest devoted to the relic in question can instantly tell
its falsehood by succeeding at a Lore (religion) Skill Test. Some false relics are of far
superior quality and spotting them may require a Skill Test of greater difficulty, making
detection far less likely.
Relic, True: True relics are extremely rare, consisting largely of the body parts and
personal possessions of the long-gone saints, prophets, and martyrs of a religion. These
items are sometimes grisly, but body parts are usually contained in sanctified jars called
reliquaries. True relics always count as holy symbols and can increase the effectiveness
of a religious centre for the purpose of learning Divine Magic (so a shrine will be as
effective as a minor temple and a minor temple as a major temple).
Retracing Tool: Designed by an ingenious miner who discovered how easy it is to get
lost in a tunnel network, the retracing tool is basically a very hard metal spike with
an angular tip similar to a chisel and a leather-wrapped handle. By dragging the edge
of the tool back and forth across the wall of a cavern or similarly confusing enclosed
structure, an easily recognised line can be made. A few more scratches and the line
becomes an arrow. Following these arrows back the way they point from should get an
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

21

Adventurer back to his original point of entry. An Adventurer who uses the retracing
tool on every corner or turn, or every ten metres will gain a +25% bonus to any skills he
uses to find his way out of the structure/network. Unfortunately, it also grants the same
bonus to any Tracking Skill Tests used to follow the Adventurer’s progress.
Ring, Bladed: This small, nondescript band of gold- or silver-coated bronze hides
a cleverly disguised razor edge. The edge is too small to inflict serious damage on
flesh, but sloppy use could open several small and painful cuts on the user’s hand. The
wearer of the bladed ring can add a +15% bonus to his Sleight skill for the purposes of
escaping bonds that may be cut through.
Rope, 10 Metres: Essential equipment for any Adventurer worth his salt, standard
hemp rope can support the weight of 50 ENC or 50 SIZ, or any combination thereof.
If knotted properly, hemp rope loses three metres of length but can add 10% to the
user’s Athletics Skill Test for the purposes of climbing.
Rope, Silken: Lighter, stronger and less abrasive to the skin, silken rope is superior to
braided hemp in nearly every way. Like its more common cousin it comes in 10 metre
lengths, but can support 60 ENC or 60 SIZ, or any combination thereof. Silken rope
requires more knots to make it more usable for climbing purposes, shortening it by
four metres.
Sack, Large: This is a wide sack of leather or canvas with one or two openings that
buckle or tie, able to hold 10 ENC of equipment. Large sacks are almost always sewn
with shoulder straps or loops to be tied to a saddle.
Sack, Secure: A wide and flat version of the small sack designed to strap to a person’s
stomach in the same fashion that a girdle would. It has the same capacity as a small
sack, but requires much more work to get to, as it is worn under clothing. It grants a
+10% bonus to Sleight Skill Tests in order to remain hidden while worn.
Sack, Small: A small sack is an over-the-shoulder bag made of leather or sometimes
canvas, similar in design to a large sack. It can hold 5 ENC of equipment, and rarely
has more than one opening, which may be buttoned.
Salt Tablets: Salt is one of the single most important spices in the world. Highly useful
in preserving, it is as an essential ingredient in the diets of most mortal races. Taking
a salt tablet once a day gives a travelling Adventurer a +10% bonus to Resilience Skill
Tests to resist the effects of forced marches, desert travel and long term exposure to
extremes of heat. There are 25 salt tablets in each packet.
Saw, Hand: This long piece of hammered metal has been sharpened to have a jagged
and serrated edge perfect for cutting through wood, which is attached to a leatherwrapped handle. With enough strokes back and forth, the hand saw can cut through
wood at a rate of 1D4 Hit Points per round – ignoring AP from the wooden object. If
used as a makeshift weapon it can be used as a crude short sword (with a –15% penalty)
but will likely never be usable as a saw again.

22

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Scatter Sticks: One of the first and earliest games, sticks has remained popular because
of its endless entertainment value. A pack of sticks allows a group of men to burn hours
in constant play. The winner of a game is determined by a contested Sleight Skill Test.
Scourge: These short leather whips often have multiple heads and are used by
worshippers to demonstrate their physical and mental discipline. By flogging themselves
with a scourge, the worshippers are also able to heighten their own concentration on
the task at hand while simultaneously displaying their devotion.
Scrollcase: A simple, hollow leather or bone tube designed to hold rolled-up sheaves of
parchment, a scrollcase is a handy tool for preserving and protecting magical scrolls. A
spell or attack must destroy the case before it can deal damage to the scroll inside. Each
scroll case may hold three scrolls.
Scrollcase, Watertight: Constructed out of tin, the caps at either end of this scroll case
are sealed with wax to prevent water running inside and ruining the contents. Such
items are much sought after at sea, for they are the only realistic way to protect maps
and magical scrolls from damage.
Scythe: Primarily a tool for harvesting grain, a scythe can be put to work as a weapon
when necessary. If used as a weapon, it is considered a bill (wielded with a –10%
penalty). The image of the scythe has been tied to various dark ideas such as death,
the apocalypse and so forth. Wielding a scythe openly adds a +10% bonus to the
user’s Influence skill for the purposes of intimidation only.
Sea Chest: A commonplace item, found within the cabins of all captains and regular
sea travellers, a sea chest is an innocuous looking item large enough to hold most of
a person’s valued possessions. However, it is extremely well constructed and is able to
resist being fully submerged in water, keeping its contents dry and safe. There are many
oft-told tales of a ship sinking with the only remains found being a sea chest floating on
the waves, still holding a doomed sailor’s most prized possessions.
Sea Salt: Collected from salt water, sea salt is generally purchased as large, composite
crystals and ground during meditations before a ritual. Used in many different ways, sea
salt is most often called upon in its capacity to cleanse dark energies from ceremonial
tools and spaces. Sea salt is preferred over other forms of salt because of its association
with water, the element of life.
Sighting Lens: A clever invention, the sighting glass consists of two or more lenses
held fast within a leather sheath. By looking through the sighting glass, distant objects
are greatly magnified and brought into focus. An Adventurer using a sighting lens will
give a +20% bonus to any Perception Skill Test when trying to spot objects more than
100 metres away.
Skates: These are hard leather shoes with sharp blades fixed to their soles. With
practice, an individual will find he can move quickly and easily across ice covered
terrain, at far faster rates than if he were walking. Skating is an advanced skill using
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

23

DEX x2. An Adventurer who successfully passes a Skating Skill Test or has a higher
than 50% skill will be able to double his normal movement rate when using them on
ice or a similar substance.
Skis: Simply in concept, hardwood skis are essential devices when travelling across
snow and they include two poles to aid balance. A practised individual will find he
can move normally across snow (no movement penalty) on flat ground and greatly
increase his speed downhill. Skiing is an advanced skill using DEX x2. An Adventurer
who successfully passes a Skiing Skill Test or has a higher than 50% skill will be able
to double his normal movement rate when moving downhill and using them on snow
or a similar substance.
Sleeping Draught: This packet of bitter herbs contains within it powerful sleeping
drugs. After drinking a mug of something with a full packet in it you must make a
Resilience Skill Test or fall into a deep sleep. You may choose to forego this save if you
wish to get a full night sleep. Drinking this draught allows the user to rest fully despite
any troubles he may otherwise have. In order to wake up before a full eight hours has
past the imbiber must make a Difficult Resilience Skill Test.
Slingbag: Also called a ‘shoulder satchel,’ this is a simple leather carryall with a long
strap to go over one shoulder. It can carry 15 ENC of equipment. It rarely has any type
of buttoning flap, merely a leather cord to tie it closed.
Snow Guards: These opaque goggles have a narrow horizontal slit cut out of the centre
of each eye covering. This gives the wearer a –20% penalty on all Persistence Skill Tests.
It also grants him a +20% bonus to any Resilience Test to avoid being blinded by light
or to resist snow-blindness.
Snowshoes: Made of hard-wearing wood, these snowshoes greatly increase the surface
area of an Adventurer’s tread in arctic conditions, thus greatly improving the ease of
travel over snow. An Adventurer wearing snowshoes will halve any movement penalty
when travelling over deep snow.
Sounding Drum: When surrounded by thick jungle or forest it can be almost impossible
to get information to or to coordinate the activities of several groups. The sounding
drum provides a solution to that. Although not well suited to music this one metre tall
drum produces a deep, resonate note that can be heard from up to five kilometres away.
Setting up the drum is a full round action; sounding it requires another.
Spade: This is a small shovel, sometimes with a detachable wooden handle. It can be
used to dig large amounts of soil or sand in relatively short order, but is all but useless
on stone or very dense earth. If used as a weapon, it is considered a club (wielded with
a –10% penalty).
Spices: Much food has long been noted for both its filling qualities and its incredible
blandness. Merchants reacted to this early on by providing spices designed to make

24

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

food more palatable. Each blend of spices is somewhat different. A single packet of
spices contains enough spice to flavour 30 meals.
Stocks: A common feature of even the smallest village, the stocks are an excellent way
to hold lawbreakers fast and ensure they realise the errors of their ways. This is a simple
wooden framework with a two part upright panel that holds both head and hands
securely. A lock is included, although its quality may vary.
Tent, 4 Person: This folding canvas tent can be set up in just a few minutes, and
will keep up to four human-sized people dry. It is not exceptionally comfortable,
which is why so many Adventurers invest in good bedrolls and warm clothing for long
journeys.
Tent, 8 Person: Held up by five poles that must be securely driven into the ground,
this tent can be set up in just under an hour by two men. Once erected properly, up to
eight human-sized individuals can sleep inside without fear for most normal weather
conditions. Some eight person tents have waxed awnings to run off rain and snow, but
most just use the inherent angle of the canvas flaps to ward off wet weather.
Thurible: Also known as a censer, this is a metal vessel designed for the ceremonial
burning of incense. The thurible is suspended on long chains, which are used to gently
swing the vessel from side to side, dispersing the fragrant smoke of burning incense
throughout the temple.
Torch, 1 Hour: A torch has one end wrapped in cloth and dipped in pitch, oil or other
similar flammable substance. It can be lit with flint and tinder in one round, or in one
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

25

Combat Action with a hand-striker, and will burn for one hour. A lit torch illuminates
a three metre radius. If used as a weapon, it is considered a club (wielded with a –10%
penalty), except that it does not inflict normal damage – instead, it inflicts 1D4 fire
damage and a fumble or critical hit will also extinguish the brand.
Torch, 6 Hour: This is a large metal-capped wooden pole that contains a supply of
oil (two flasks) in its decanted end. Other than functioning as a staff instead of a club,
and burning for six hours instead of one, this item has the same characteristics as the
one-hour variety.
Torch, Waterproof: Using alchemical additives soaked into the torch, then sealed in
with pitch and wax, the waterproof torch burns with a strange sparking flame that is
extremely hot and hard to look directly into. However, as the name implies, there is
only a 15% chance that any source of water will be able to extinguish the chemical
flame per round of exposure. The sparking and sizzling flame lasts for 30 minutes, and
subtracts 10% from the holder’s Perception skill. Also, should the waterproof torch
ever be used as a club, it inflicts 1D6 fire damage instead of the regular 1D4.
Travois: A travois is two wooden bars with a tarp slung between them in a triangular
shape. The narrow end of the travois has a strap that can be attached to an animal’s
shoulders or pulled across a Medium sized creature’s chest. Cargo can be loaded onto
the canvas section of the travois. Using a travois triples the carrying capacity of those
using one, but at the cost of being forced to move at a maximum of half their speed.
Tree Net: This is a toughened hide attached to a folding framework of thin wood that,
when opened and attached to suitable branches, allows an Adventurer to sleep within
a tree without fear of falling out. The advantages of sleeping within trees while in the
wilderness are obvious, for many travellers have fallen prey to the monstrous predators
that stalk the ground.
Underwater Goggles: A pair of leather-rimmed cups with polished glass lenses fitted to
a leather strap, underwater goggles allow the wearer to see easily in the murky depths.
This reduces any Perception penalties to the wearer by –10% while underwater.
Walking Stick: This short, stout wooden rod is normally capped with a bronze or iron
tip. While useless in combat, a walking stick provides a +10% bonus to Acrobatics Skill
Tests if its bearer uses it to brace himself against the ground with it. The stick provides
this bonus applies only if the Acrobatics Skill Tests was forced by unsteady ground, an
earthquake or similar event - the walking stick is useless when making a Acrobatics
Skill Tests to walk a tightrope, for example. If used in combat, a walking stick counts
as a club.
Water Additive: This small vial of pure alcohol can be added to pools of brackish
water, thereby making it fit for consumption. Only needs one drop is required for every
half pint of water. Any required Resilience Test for consuming such water is receives a
+10% bonus if the additive has been used. Water additive only works against potential
diseases, not poisons.

26

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Water Pack: This heavy pack consists of a tar and wax sealed leather waterskin attached
to two straps. It allows its user to carry up to 25 litres of water.
Water Trap: A water trap is comprised of several large, waxed sheets of tarp as well as
a three metre square wooden frame and a simple ceramic container. Each night when
the water trap is spread out it collects dew and rolls it down into the container. Every
night the trap collects 1D4-1 daily rations of water for men or beasts.
Waterskin: A waterskin is a lined bladder or sewn leather pouch designed to contain
liquids, with a wooden or bone spout at one end for pouring. A typical waterskin can
hold enough water to sustain an Adventurer for two days, but can also be used to hold
wine, poison or other liquids equally well.
Wax, Block: Used for a variety of reasons in several professions, beeswax is much like
rope in that many Adventurers find ways to put it to inventive use. Thieves will press
keys into it in order to make effective forgeries, alchemists might need it to seal up
potions or component bottles, and archers might want to wax the fletching on their
arrows for faster flight.
Weatherproofing Kit: Containing oils, waxes, resins and buffing pads, this kit can
be used to keep the rigours of common weather from harming any wooden or leather
objects for weeks at a time. By applying the specific components to the goods in
question, the items will not suffer damage from commonplace weather for seven days.
Each kit can weatherproof 100 ENC worth of items before it is used up.
Wine, Ritual: Wine is used in rituals to symbolise blood, especially during rites that
would be tainted by the shedding of actual vital fluids. Blessed during a ceremony, wine
is often used to anoint objects, denote lines of power, and imbibed to gain the favour
of the divine. While used in this capacity, any spilling of sacred wine is considered an
extremely bad omen and is usually grounds for invalidation of the entire ritual.
Writing Kit: The basic writing kit contains several vials of black ink, as well as brushes,
quills and pens used for calligraphy and scribing. The largest part of the kit is a thin
sheet of wood, the same dimensions as a piece of papyrus. For an additional cost
writing kits can also contain coloured inks, but these are often saved for tattoo artists
or noble scribes.
Yarn, 50 metres: Spun from goat, lamb or yak’s wool, yarn is the primary component
in knitting and many of the tailoring trades. Although not as strong as twine or leather
cord, yarn can be used in a pinch to tie objects or reinforce clothing tears, but is also
known to be useful as a trail to follow in extremely dark settings such as caverns or
labyrinths.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

27

Adventuring Gear and Basic Items
Item
Acid, Vial
Altar, Portable
Altar Shroud
Anatomy Kit
Animal Call/Whistle
Animal Snare/Trap
Anti-fungal Ointment
Appraisal Kit
Ashen Powder
Back Travois
Backpack
Bag of Glass Beads
Beads, Prayer
Bedroll
Besom
Blackface
Blade Sharpener
Blessed Food
Block and Tackle
Blood Decoy
Body Sled
Bottle, Glass
Branding Iron
Breath Bag
Bull-roarer
Candle, 1 hour
Candle, 2 hour
Candle, 6 hour
Candle, Religious
Candle Snuff
Candlemaking Kit
Cards
Chain, 2m
Chalice
Chalk
Clay and Wax Box
Climbing Kit
Codex
Compass
Craft tools
Crowbar
Crutches
Dice Set
Doorjamb

28

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

ENC
1
3
2
1
—
2
1
2
—
3
1
—
—
1
—
—
2
1
1
—
4
—
1
—
1
—
—
1
—
—
2
—
2
1
—
1
1
1
—
2
1
2
—
2

Cost
20 SP
300 SP
50 SP
50 SP
1 SP
7 SP
25 SP
25 SP
20 SP
30 SP
5/7 SP
10 SP
30 SP
1 SP
5 SP
10 SP
10 SP
2 SP
15 SP
5 CP
60 SP
2 SP
3 SP
4 SP
8 SP
1 CP
3 CP
1 SP
10 SP
2 SP
50 SP
10 SP
40 SP
100 SP
5 CP
40 SP
25 SP
60 SP
100 SP
75 SP
25 SP
8 SP
1 SP
5 SP

Item
Dowsing Rod
Dye, Coloured
Elfen Bowstring
Erasing Broom
Everyday Tonic
Exploding Egg
Fairy Dust
False Face Kit
Familiar’s Pack
Figurine
Fins
Fire Seed
Fire Wheel
First Aid Kit
Fish Hooks (5)
Fishing Kit
Flare Paste
Flash Powder
Flint and Tinder
Folding Stool
Font, Great
Font, Portable

ENC
1
1
—
1
1
—
—
1
1
—
1
—
1
—
—
1
—
—
—
1
30
1

Cost
300 SP
13 SP
150 SP
2 SP
10 SP
10 SP
15 SP
150 SP
15 SP
2 SP
20 SP
2 SP
10 SP
25 SP
1 CP
15 SP
12 SP
2 SP
5 CP
15 SP
1,000 SP
150 SP

Footpads
Glass Cutter
Glass, Reflecting
Grappling Hook
Grappling Hook, Assassin’s
Grindstone
Hammer
Hand-striker
Handpouch
Healer’s Kit
Hourglass
Horn, Hunting
Horn, Speaking
Horse Nails
Howler
Icepick
Icon
Insect Netting
Insect Repellent
Jacks
Jailbreak Tools
Knockout Powder, Vial

1
—
1
—
—
8
1
—
—
1
1
1
1
1
—
—
1
1
1
—
1
1

12 SP
10 SP
20 SP
5 SP
20 SP
20 SP
1 SP
3 SP
5 SP
150 SP
20 SP
8 SP
5 SP
15 SP
6 SP
6 SP
200 SP
300 SP
2 SP
1 SP
40 SP
80 SP

Item
Ladder, 3m
Ladder, Grappling
Lantern, Basic
Lantern, Cowled
Lantern, Hanging
Listening Cone
Lock Picks
Magnifying Lens
Marbles
Milling Stones
Mining Pick
Musical Instrument
Net, Fishing
Net, Handled
Noble Seal
Oar, Collapsible
Offering Bowl
Oil, Flask
Oil, Jellied
Oil, Weapon
Papyrus, Sheet
Parasol
Pendulum
Pepper
Poison Antidote
Pole, 3m
Pottery Wheel
Preservative Fluid
Preserving Kit
Quenching Blanket
Quick Sheath
Quick Sheath, Wrist
Quiver
Rangeglass
Razor, Folding
Relic Case
Relic, False
Relic, True
Retracing Tool
Reversable Clothes
Ring, Bladed
Rope, 10m
Rope, Silken

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

ENC
4
3
1
1
1
—
—
—
—
2
1
2
4
1
—
2
1
1
2
1
—
1
2
—
1
1
25
1
2
5
1
—
—
1
—
2
1
1
—

Cost
2 SP
8 SP
10 SP
12 SP
14 SP
8 CP
75 SP
10 SP
1 SP
8 SP
35 SP
70 SP
10 SP
10 SP
100 SP
5 SP
5 SP
1 SP
10 SP
2 SP
5 CP
60 SP
45 SP
5 SP
100 SP
1 SP
25 SP
30 SP
10 SP
6 SP
20 SP
15 SP
2 SP
300 SP
3 SP
50 SP
5 SP
10,000 SP
2 SP

—
2
1

15 SP
10 SP
75 SP

Item
Sack, large
Sack, Secure
Sack, Small
Salt Tablets
Saw, Hand
Scatter Sticks
Scourge
Scrollcase
Scrollcase, Watertight
Scythe
Sea Chest
Sea Salt
Sighting Lens
Skates
Skis
Sleeping Draft
Slingbag
Snow Guards
Snow Shoes
Sounding Drum
Spade
Spices
Stocks
Tent, 4 person
Tent, 8 person
Thurible
Torch, 1 hour
Torch, 6 hour
Torch, Waterproof
Travois
Tree Net
Underwater Goggles
Walking Stick
Water Additive
Water Pack
Water Trap
Waterskin
Wax, Block
Weatherproofing Kit
Wine, Ritual
Writing Kit
Yarn, 50m

ENC
1
—
—
—
1
—
—
—
—
2
4
1
1
1
3
1
1
—
1
1
1
—
5
2
5
1
—
1
—
3
1
—
1
1
6
4
1
1
1
1
1
1

Cost
5 CP
1 SP
2 CP
3 SP
1 SP
2 CP
2 SP
5 CP
3 SP
30 SP
25 SP
1 SP
80 SP
15 SP
20 SP
10 SP
5 CP
7 SP
5 SP
15 SP
25 SP
5 SP
20 SP
10 SP
50 SP
100 SP
4 CP
8 CP
2 SP
5 SP
12 SP
15 SP
5 SP
3 SP
10 SP
40 SP
5 CP
2 CP
10 SP
15 SP
45 SP
7 CP

29

Riding and Animal Supplies

Properly outfitting a mount or beast of burden is as important as equipping one’s
self. Without the appropriate equipment, managing any form of animal becomes
burdensome. Animals may not respond or respond poorly; and their endurance may be
compromised if they are not properly shod, bedded-down and so on.
The Riding and Animal Supplies table below shows a number of items and supplies
that Adventurers could find very useful when dealing with animals (like those found
in the Beasts and Cohorts chapter of this book), how much they weigh in ENC and
their general market cost.
Barding: This is a category of any type of armour that has been forged or made
specifically for a mount of some kind. From plate leggings on a knightly stallion to
the spiked leather found on a gladiator’s tiger, barding can be created in all of the
same ways as armour for a regular humanoid. In order to create barding, the buyer
must multiply the cost of the armour segment by two for leg locations, three for the
head section, and five for any sort of body coverings. Tails and wings are equivalent to
leg sections and multiplied by two. If wings have barding they are useless for flying.
The ENC of the barding will be roughly equal to 2.5 times the current ENC of an
equivalent standard armour segment depending on the size of the animal, and will
follow all of the same rules for the material it is made of (see the Armour chapter of
this book for types of armour).

Riding and Animal Supplies

30

Item

ENC

Cost

Barding

Varies

See Description

Bit and Bridle

1

15 SP

Blanket and Hood

2

15 SP

Cage, 2m x 2m

10

100 SP

Crop

—

15 SP

Driver’s Whip

—

25 SP

Falconer’s Kit

1

30 SP

Feed/Mount Rations 1
(Per Day)

5 CP

Goad

1

25 SP

Leash and Muzzle

—

15 SP

Resting Mood

—

8 SP

Saddle, Flight

3

100 SP

Saddle, Pack

5

65 SP

Saddle, Riding

3

60 SP

Saddle, War

4

90 SP

Saddlebag

2

20 SP

Shoes, Horse

1

10 SP

Shoes, War

2

14 SP

Tarp, Wintered

3

6 SP

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Bit and Bridle: This is a short piece
of leather or metal that is placed in
the mouth of a mount and attached to
a set of leather or chain reins to allow
the rider or driver to steer the beast.
Although it does not offer any sort of
bonus to Riding or Driving tests, not
having a bit and bridle on a mount when
an Adventurer Critically Fumbles one
of the above tests can be catastrophic (at
the Games Master’s discretion).
Blanket and Hood, Horse: Essential
when travelling to colder climes, the
fur-lined horse hood and blanket will
keep a mount warm and free of ice
during cold nights in camp. A mount
wearing a blanket and hood receives a
+20% bonus to all Resilience Skill Tests
caused by cold weather.
Cage, 2m x 2m: Useful for holding
unruly animals that are either untrained
or just too savage to be left to their own

devices, cages can be of many sizes but 2m x 2m seems to be the most useful for most great
cats, dogs and other animals. With the proper locking mechanism and a good night time
covering to help the animal stay calm, a cage can be a perfect home for a dangerous beast.
Crop: The crop is a piece of wood, bone or metal with a folded leather strap at the
end. It is used to force a mount to push harder. Spurring movement with the stinging
and noisy ‘pop’ of a crop on the hindquarters of a ridden mount can sometimes bring
higher speeds. In game terms this allows a rider to make an additional Riding Skill
Test to increase speed, though he can only do so three turns in a row before the mount
becomes numb and no longer cares – or worse, gets angry at the sensation! Anyone
struck repeatedly with a riding crop on bare flesh will eventually suffer a level of Fatigue
(typically after four to five minutes of constant abuse).
Driver’s Whip: A length of thin and flexible wood tipped with a long, thin piece of
resin-coated cord or braided leather, a driver’s whip is used to sting the flanks of drawing
mounts from the driver’s bench of a wagon, coach or cart. Similar to how a riding crop
affects a ridden mount, the stinging ‘crack’ of a driver’s whip on the hindquarters or backs
of drawing mounts can bring higher speeds out of the entire team. In game terms this
allows a driver to make an additional Driving Skill Test to increase speed, but he can only
do so a number of turns in a row equal to the number of drawing mounts attached to the
vehicle before the team no longer responds.
Falconer’s Kit: This kit includes a thick leather glove or gauntlet with cord sewn to it
in order to tether a falcon or hunting hawk when at rest. It also includes a leather or
wooden hood that fits over the eyes and ears of the bird in an effort to keep the animal
calm before releasing it to perform its duties. Anyone attempting to perform Craft
(Falconry) Skill Tests without a full falconer’s kit suffers a –5% penalty to his Skill Test.
Feed/Mount Rations: Whether it is a supply of corn mash and oats for a stallion,
sardines for a sea lion or osprey, or chunks of raw horsemeat for a griffon, this category
covers the road rations needed to keep a mount healthy and strong. If they do not pack
additional feed, Adventurers will need to make additional Survival or Tracking rolls
every week in order to keep their mounts from becoming sickly or unruly.
Goad: A thick-hafted piece of ivory, bone or wood tipped with a rounded hook
and jabbing pinion, a goad is like a riding crop for thicker-skinned beasts. Reptiles,
pachyderms, rhinos and the like will ignore the barely-felt slap of a crop, but will notice
the irritating jab or tug of a goad. Users of a goad must be careful not to use it too
often or too forcefully, as most of the thicker-skinned mounts can quite easily become
dangerously hostile at a moment’s notice. All of the normal rules for a crop apply to a
goad, except that a goad can be wielded in combat in the same way as a gaff (see page
62) but with a –10% penalty to hit.
Leash and Muzzle: Some animals, like dogs and great cats, are not able to use a bit and
bridle. These animals have tearing teeth that are not safe to have exposed and free to
bite handlers or passers by. The leash and muzzle is a set of external leather straps that
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

31

keeps the animal from using its bite attack effectively. Otherwise, the leash and muzzle
acts exactly as a bit and bridle for these animals.
Resting Hood: Most animals are instinctively calmer and more accepting of outside
stimuli when they cannot see it clearly. Placing a dark leather hood over the eyes and
ears of the animal does not necessarily make it easier to train but does make it far less
likely to get stressed or attack randomly. In game terms this is translated to the ability
to re-roll one failed Lore (Animal) test per day (per animal) when trying to calm or
move an animal wearing a resting hood. Fumbles may not be re-rolled.
Saddle, Flight: A specialised saddle designed for beasts with wings like griffons and sky
bulls, this is a must for aerial cavalry. The flight saddle has additional thigh stirrups that
keep a rider leaning forward and tethered to the animal as it wings its way through the
air. This can be a slight problem at times though, as the straps are decidedly difficult to
unlatch when in motion – requiring a Mechanisms roll at +10% to do so in combat.
Saddle, Pack: This is basically a riding saddle with two sets of attached saddlebags
and an additional wooden cage for goods where a rider would normally sit. A normal
set of saddlebags can hold up to 30 ENC of gear. The pack saddle increases this to an
impressive 40 ENC – but leaves no room for a rider at all.
Saddle, Riding: This is the most common form of leather saddle, and is the style
that most riders prefer for long trips. Even though it does not offer any sort of bonus
to Riding Skill Tests, riding a horse at anything faster than a brisk walk without one
imposes a –10% penalty to Riding.
Saddle, War: The heaviest of saddles, a war saddle has a raised front horn that has been
riveted to protect the rider, a padded back portion that rises up a full hand’s span from a
common saddle in order to support an armoured rider and several additional buckles to
attach to barding. It is not the most comfortable of rides, as it inflicts one level of Fatigue
per full eight hours of use, but it does add +10% to any Riding Skill Tests made during
combat or to any test for the rider to stay in the saddle after a particularly forceful hit or
attack.
Saddlebag: This is a category of canvas, leather or cloth bags designed to be draped
over the shoulders or flanks of a mount in order for it to carry more equipment or
goods for the owner. Each saddlebag can carry 15 ENC worth of weight and is often
sewn in pairs of two for evenness on the back of a mount.
Shoes, Horse: Common metal shoes nailed to the bottom of hoofed animals,
‘horseshoes’ are designed to keep sharp stones and gravel from chipping or getting
impacted in the comparatively soft hoof. Although not the most comfortable of
augmentations to a mount, they are far better than ever having to deal with a split
or cracked hoof. Hoofed mounts that do not have shoes will need to be rested more
frequently in order to remove detritus, imposing a –10% penalty to travel times
through any type of rocky or stony terrain.

32

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Shoes, War: These are specially crafted combat shoes made for hoofed mounts. Not
only do they have all of the same benefits of common horseshoes, but are forged with
raised studs on the underside and two prongs that curve upward to give the animal a
much deadlier kick. Any hoofed animal wearing war shoes inflicts an additional 1D4
damage with a kick or trample attack, but suffers a –20% penalty to travel times due
to cumbersome footwear.
Tarp, Wintered: Mounts and animal companions are sometimes taken for granted,
especially in the winter months. Many breeds can suffer negative effects from the cold,
snow and ice just as the Adventurers can. Thoughtful or prepared animal handlers can
use these thick leather tarps to keep the cold weather from harming their animals. Any
animal wearing a wintered tarp can add +10% to its Survival or Resilience Skill Tests
to avoid the effects of natural cold but suffer a –1m to every Movement action due to
its bulk and restrictiveness.

Clothing
This section is a collection of outfits and special clothing that are available from place
-to-place. Unlike common goods, many of these items are very self-explanatory.

Clothing Descriptions

Aba: These desert robes are made of a light fabric, covering the whole body and
typically brown or white in colour. A humanoid will usually wear several layers of these
fabrics, with light colours worn under dark colours. In hot or dry climates, an Aba helps
prevent perspiration, allowing to wearer to retain water. In hot, dry conditions the
wearer gains a +10% bonus to his Survival skill. In environments with high humidity
there is no benefit from wearing Aba. An Adventurer must be shown how to wear Aba
properly. If the Adventurer does not have a guide, he must succeed Survival Test when
he first tries to wear an Aba.
Apron, Industrial: This is a heavy leather apron worn by smiths, glass blowers and
other professionals who must withstand direct and oppressive heat. Its special design
makes it heavy (2 ENC) but it can shield the wearer’s chest, abdomen and upper legs
from up to 10 points of heat-based damage per minute. It is awkward to move around
in, and imposes a –10% Evade penalty because of its stiffness.
Bandolier: A leather belt worn from one shoulder to the opposite hip, a bandolier
allows an Adventurer to keep several small items at hand by tucking them in the half
dozen or so loops it is sewn with. Often used to carry tools or small weapons, the
bandolier can also be adjusted to hold two larger-sized weapons (such as a sword or an
axe) in the back as well as small items in the front.
Belt Buckle, Thieves’: This is a large ornamental belt buckle that can be slid to one
side with a successful Sleight Skill Test, revealing a small compartment large enough to
carry a set of lock picks, a handful of coins or a few gemstones. It is commonly used by
thieves as the –50% penalty to Perception it imposes on anyone searching the wearer
makes it perfect for hiding small objects.
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

33

Boots, Bladed: These stout boots are designed specifically to aid climbers of trees
and soft rock. With toughened soles holding an upturned blade secure, a climber can
scale sheer surfaces easily with very little practice. The upturned blades ensure that
movement is not impeded though the heavy construction of this footwear makes the
wearer very easy to track. Bladed boots give the wearer a +10% bonus to their Climb
skill when scaling trees or other softer surfaces. However, a +20% bonus is granted to
any Track Test made to follow the wearer.
Boots, Thieves’: Although they look like a common pair of comfortable boots, thieves’
boots have a hollow heel and a number of hidden pockets along the underside of the
cuff. With access to the secret compartments, the wearer (or anyone who can make a
Perception test at –50%) can find/hide up to 20 coins, five gemstones and a small knife
or similar objects in each boot.
Catsuit, Intruder’s: Made from suede, stitched with silk and dyed the darkest black
with grey undertones, the intruder’s catsuit is a hooded full body suit that must be
fitted to the wearer by a tailor using the Craft (Tailor) skill at –10%. Once fitted the
suit is lightweight and durable, but also padded and smoothed at all the right points in
order to be remarkably silent. Anyone wearing a fitted catsuit is granted a +10% to his
Stealth skill, +25% if used at night or in darkness.
Coat, Winter: This woolly coat lined with rabbit or beaver fur is thick and warm,
repelling the stiff and bitter winds of the high mountains or cold winters. Anyone
wearing a winter coat can add +10% to his Survival or Resilience Skill Tests to avoid
the effects of natural cold.
Cloak, Winter: A large fur and leather cloak with an extra flap to close around the
body completely, a winter cloak is too heavy and thick to wear all the time but does a
great deal to ward off the wind and snow in such conditions. Anyone wearing a winter
cloak can add +10% to his Survival or Resilience Skill Tests to avoid the effects of
natural cold. A winter cloak may also be used as a warm blanket/bedroll combination.
Collar, Ornamental: This item represents a wide variety of ornamental collars that can
alter an observer’s view of the wearer. From the leather and spikes of a gladiator, to the

But It’s Only a Bit of Platemail…
Whilst many Adventurers will spend a great deal of time clad in armour, anything other
than leather becomes uncomfortable due to its heat, weight, liability to chaff, and so
on. Furthermore, it is simply not acceptable to wander around a town or city dressed
in armour. It may not be illegal, necessarily, but unless a settlement is in a time of war
it is simply not the done thing. Anyone who insists on wearing armour in a civilised
settlement outside a time of conflict suffers a penalty to his Influence roll equal to twice
the armour’s Armour Penalty. Only leather armour is exempt from this rule.

34

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

high-velvet of a noble, to the pearls and beads of a harlot – there are several versions of
collars. Each one offers a +5% bonus to the Influence skill when used in a way befitting
the type of collar (Games Master’s discretion).
Corset: Made from a variety of materials stretched over thin whale bones and laced
impossibly tight to squeeze a female (and sometimes a male) into an extremely
enticing shape, the corset is often worn under a dress or fanciful costume in order
to give the person that extra edge in social circles. A lady wearing a corset can be
considered to have a +5% to her Influence skill when dealing with targets that could
be theoretically seduced by her attractive shape. However, any activity other than
regular paced walking or slow dancing requires a Resilience test or a level of Fatigue
is taken by the wearer as the corset robs much mobility and breathing room.
Gauntlets, Clawed: These armoured gloves end in long, sharpened spikes designed
to aid in climbing. When used in conjunction with an Athletics (climb) Skill Test
the gauntlets grant a +5% bonus. In addition, most rogues sharpen the spikes’ edges,
making them effective weapons, giving a +1 bonus to any damage from a punch.
Gloves, Fire: Many alchemists find that they need to handle very hot objects for
extended periods of time. These gloves were made to meet that need. They have heavy
hide on the palm surface, backed by non-conductive fibres from a particular kind
of stone and a thin metal mesh. The innermost layer is typically heavy cloth. The
wearer of the gloves has a –10% penalty to any Skill Test requiring fine manipulation
of objects. The gloves absorb five points of heat damage to the arms every round.
Gloves, Industrial: These are heavy leather gloves worn by blacksmiths, armourers
and other professionals who must withstand direct and oppressive heat. Their special
design makes them rather heavy for gloves (1 ENC) but do well to shield the wearer’s
hands and forearms from up to 10 points of heat-based damage per minute. They are
rather stiff and unyielding, imposing a –10% penalty to any skills requiring manual
dexterity – including combat.
Gloves, Thieves’: These fingerless suede gloves are lightweight and lashed to the wearer’s
wrists tightly. With a flip of the thumb, a small flap on the palm of the glove can be
opened briefly to slide something (like a coin or ring) into the glove before closing once
more with a roll of the little finger. This offers the wearer a +5% bonus to Sleight, which
can only be performed once per hand before to the object must be removed.
Hat, Cowled: Used by assassins and bandits, but also by vigilantes and anonymous
heroes, the cowled hat – or just cowl – is a rolled piece of suede cut with eyeholes and
breathing vents attached to a wide-brimmed hat. With just a quick flip the suede rolls
down from beneath the brim to become a mask that can be laced or buckled quickly
at the back of the head. The cowl hides all facial features other than eye colour and can
be decorated to look however the wearer wishes it to. The lack of facial features and
hidden hair and skin grants a +10% bonus to Disguise rolls to hide the wearer’s true
persona.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

35

Hat, Winter: This is a heavy woollen cap with flaps of rabbit fur or lambs’ fleece that
can be tied down over the sides of the face and ears. Some winter hats even have a
flap that might cover the face as well. Anyone wearing a winter hat can add +5% to
his Survival and Resilience Skill Tests to withstand mundane cold and related weather
effects.
Headdress: This catch all item covers all manner of ritual head gear, from antlered
crowns to swan feather veils. Headdresses often symbolise the wearer becoming the
creature depicted by the item.
Mask: A simple device and yet one a shocking number of novice thieves always seem
to forget. Though many are highly elaborate, a mask need be nothing more expensive
than solid black leather obscuring the wearer’s face. Any Adventurer wearing a mask
will be unidentifiable if he encounters others he has never met (though he should
also take care to wear nondescript clothing and wield common weapons). If he does
encounter someone he knows, the mask grants a +10% bonus to his Disguise Skill Test.
Reversible Clothes: Usually made as a shirt and pants suit or a dress, reversible clothes
can be pulled off extremely quickly, turned inside out, and put back on with little effort.
With practice, a set of reversible clothes can be inverted and worn within the space of
six seconds. Both sides of reversible clothing are patterned differently and appear to
be of wildly disparate styles. Performs use them for quick costume changes, while folk
in less honest lines of work can use them as nearly instantaneous disguise attempts.
Games Master may allow a wearer who uses reversible clothes from concealment to
evade pursuers depending on the circumstances.
Robe, Religious: This is another category of clothing that varies greatly from religion
-to-religion. A dark faith of death-worship might have long black and purple robes of
silk and taffeta, where a faith of dawn and sunshine might have bright yellow and white
linens. A robe marks the wearer as a member of that faith’s clergy, and may require
onlookers to make specific Lore Skill Tests to figure out which faith that might be.
Such robes give the wearer a +10% bonus to his Influence skill when dealing with any
member of the faith represented by the robes.
Tabard, Hearldic: Similar in make to a common tabard, but normally constructed
of better quality linens and dyes, the heraldic tabard bears a colourful and easily
recognisable insignia or crest of a guild, noble house or similar group. Wearing
a heraldic tabard automatically brings assumptions that the wearer is a member or
employee of the group depicted. Depending on those he is dealing with, the Games
Master should assign up to +/–25% to any Influence Skill Tests he has to make. After
all, wearing the king’s colours and crest can have a much different effect on loyal serfs
then it does on cutthroat highwaymen!
Umbrella Hat: This massive, slightly conical, reed hat reaches just past your shoulders.
Although somewhat clumsy they do a fine job of keeping the rain off of an Adventurer’s
head.

36

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Vest, Assassin’s: A tight-fitting suede vest designed to fit to the wearer under a loose shirt
or coat, the assassin’s vest is so-named due to the nature of its most common users. The
vest has five loops along the ribs for knives, holding such weapons tightly so as to keep
them from notice. It has three small padded pockets that can carry vials of poison or other
chemicals safely and a space under the hem where a clever killer could place a garrotte. All
of these items should have a +15% Sleight skill bonus to avoid being noticed at a glance,
and can be reached by either hand as a standard Combat Action.

Clothing
Article of Clothing
Aba
Apron, Industrial
Baldric
Bandolier
Belt, Leather
Belt, Fancy
Belt buckle, Thieves’
Boots, Bladed
Boots, Common
Boots, High
Boots, Riding
Boots, Thieves’
Breeches, Common
Breeches, Fancy
Bustle
Catsuit, Intruder’s

Cost
6 SP
4 SP
2 SP
8 CP
6 CP
2 SP
10 SP
20 SP
6 SP
8 SP
10 SP
25 SP
1 SP
3 SP
2 SP
35 SP

Cape

3 SP

Coat, Common
Coat, Fancy
Coat, Winter
Cloak, Common
Cloak, Winter
Collar, Ornamental
Corset
Doublet, Common
Doublet, Fancy
Dress, Common
Dress, Fancy
Dress, Noble
Gauntlets, Clawed
Gloves, Common

2 SP
8 SP
10 SP
2 SP
12 SP
5 SP
4 SP
8 CP
2 SP
2 SP
5 SP
150 SP
8 SP
5 CP

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Article of Clothing
Gloves, Fire
Gloves, Fancy
Gloves, Industrial
Gloves, Thieves’
Hat, Brimmed
Hat, Cowled
Hat, Winter
Headdress
Loincloth
Mask
Reversable Clothes
Robe, Woollen
Robe, Religious
Sash, Common
Sash, Fancy
Shirt, Common
Shirt, Fancy
Shirt, Noble
Shoes, Common
Shoes, Fancy
Shoes, Sandals
Shoes, Tabi
Skirt, Leather
Tabard, Common
Tabard, Heralded
Toga, Common
Toga, Fancy
Toga, Noble
Tunic, Common
Tunic, Fancy
Umbrella Hat
Vest, Assassin’s

Cost
30 SP
2 SP
4 SP
5 SP
8 CP
1 SP
4 SP
20 SP
1 CP
5 CP
30 SP
2 SP
25 SP
3 CP
2 SP
2 CP
2 SP
75 SP
2 SP
6 SP
1 SP
10 SP
5 SP
7 CP
10 SP
5 CP
2 SP
100 SP
6 CP
2 SP
2 SP
25 SP

37

TRADING & QUALITY
This chapter concerns the trading of items and their differing quality of
production.
The availability and price of goods is affected by the type of settlement where it is
bought. Legend categorises settlements into the categories shown.

Hamlet

A hamlet is a tiny village, usually with between one and five extended families living in
the area. The vast majority of the hamlet’s people are involved in whatever the primary
industry of the area may be – farming in grasslands, fishing on a waterway, logging
or hunting in a forest. Unless the hamlet is in a civilised culture the primary unit of
exchange is bartering, although such people often have a few coins’ worth of actual
money as well.
The average hamlet has a number of people with auxiliary skills. For instance, although
all adults may be farmers, one or two may also have skill as thatchers or carpenters,
trading their knowledge and labour in return for additional food or other goods. It is
unlikely a hamlet will have even so much as a maintained shrine inside it. Citizens of a
hamlet must rely on itinerant peddlers for any goods they cannot produce themselves.
Such peddlers commonly pass through once a month or so.

Village

Consisting of up to 200 people, a village generally (but not always) has a selection of
basic amenities: a tavern or an inn; a smithy; and perhaps a store of some kind selling
the most basic of goods – usually locally sourced produce. A village usually has a shrine
Settlement Type
Hamlet
Village
Small Town
Medium Town
Large Town
Small City
Medium City
Large City
Capital/Metropolis

38

Cultures
All
All
Barbarian, Nomad, Civilised
Barbarian, Nomad, Civilised
Civilised
Civilised
Civilised
Civilised
Civilised

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Population
10 – 30
30 – 200
200 – 500
500 – 1,000
1,000 – 3,000
3,000 – 5,000
5,000 – 10,000
10,000 – 20,000
20,000+

Price Factor
2
1.5
1.25
1.25
1
1
1.25
1.5
2

to the local god or gods. In barbarian cultures a village may be known as a stead and
consist of a clan of families belonging to a larger tribe.
Like the hamlet, a village has people with auxiliary skills, although the form of trade is
still likely to be barter unless it is in a civilised culture.

Small Town

With up to 500 souls the majority of the people in a small town will be involved in
whatever the primary industry of the area is, but they will also have some citizens
specialised in other trades. A small town will almost always have at least one dedicated
thatcher, tool smith or farrier, carpenter, potter and weaver. Towns are the smallest
form of civilisation where one is likely to find community-oriented businesses, such
as taverns or inns. Additionally, it is the smallest form of civilisation to boast a regular
marketplace, a permanent site where people from the area come together to buy and
sell goods, most often on a weekly basis. Travelling traders will organise their schedules
to arrive in towns on trading day.
Most villages include a resident priest who serves as spiritual caretaker for the people
and administer of a local shrine. Commonly, this priest would only qualify as an initiate
in a larger city but it is not impossible to find a village shrine administered by a retired
acolyte who attained great status in his youth.
Small towns usually exist on an economy that is equal parts barter-based and
monetary.

Medium Town

Having up to 1,000 people a medium town’s residents are generally involved in a single
local industry, although there will be many others who pursue different occupations. A
medium town commonly has at least one smith, several carpenters, thatchers, weavers
and so forth. A medium town always has at least a shrine in it as a place of worship and
may even have a larger religious centre, depending on the local culture.
A medium town is likely to have a reasonable sized market, held regularly, where
traders, farmers and others from outlying areas come to sell their produce. Markets
may be seasonal affairs, less regular in winter months.

Large Town/Small City

With up to 5,000 residents, a large town or small city has often grown too large for
its immediately available food sources, which means food must be imported from
outlying areas.
Expect this level of settlement to have one or more permanent marketplaces that do a
daily business, as well as a number of individual shops where particular goods can be
bought and sold. At this size of settlement, monetary exchange has all but completely
replaced the barter system. A small city is very likely to be engaged in an active trading
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

39

enterprise, particularly if it lies on a sea coast or major river. Such a city will have
warehouses and other facilities for storing and shipping goods. If it lies on a waterway,
there will be a significant dock system in place.
A small city is likely to have one or two major temples, as well as a number of other
shrines. It is not uncommon for one or more sorcerers to make their homes in small
cities, particularly those lying along important trade routes.
A small city is often built around the home and holdings of a major noble such as a count
or duke, who acts as head of a bureaucratic government. This is the largest settlement type
of barbarian cultures.

Medium City

A medium city boasts a population of up to 10,000, and is likely to have a controlling
nobility and be the domain or province of a powerful noble such as a duke or earl.
Cities of this size and larger require good transportation systems (usually by water)
as their lifeblood is almost always trade. Such a large number of people cannot feed
themselves through local resources and importing food is sure to be a lucrative industry.
A medium city will have a number of permanent marketplaces scattered throughout it,
possibly even specialised marketplaces for particular types of goods.
In addition to craftsmen practising all the basic trades, such as carpentry and
blacksmithing, a medium city will almost certainly be a centre of manufacture or trade
with a certain number of luxury items rarely available elsewhere, such as large musical
instruments, works of art and fabulously expensive pieces of armour.
A medium city will have at least one great temple or church, manned by a permanent
clergy. Sorcerers may also make their homes in large cities too, relying upon the constant
stream of trade to bring them knowledge and materials they need.

Large City

With a population of up to 20,000 a large city boasts all the amenities of a medium
city and will be founded on the rulership of a duke, at the very least. Several temples
to the local gods are found along with smaller temples and shrines to lesser and even
foreign gods, all with attendant clergy. Large cities tend to be centres of strategic
importance: a barracks and permanent military presence is not uncommon. The city
is also likely to be walled with a certain degree of security monitoring who enters and
leaves. Large cities require a bureaucracy to maintain the place, which reports to the
ruling noble. Guilds and other trade factions are highly likely, as are distinct political
sects with an interest in controlling the power base.

Capital/Metropolis

With populations in the tens of thousands a capital or metropolis has the widest
array of goods and services available. Most items can be found here, but prices are
not guaranteed to be low, despite the availability. Guilds may control pricing and aim

40

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

to protect their members’ livelihoods but with a certain balance to ensure a market
still thrives.
The main characteristic of a settlement of this size is that it controls a sizeable region
politically and militarily. It is likely the seat of the ruler and will have competing political
and religious interests. The temples will be the grandest and largest as a testament to
both wealth and power. A capital or metropolis is almost certainly walled or defended
to heavy degree as it represents a significant strategic target. Prices in the city reflect
the expensive upkeep needed plus the requirements of a large, permanent bureaucracy.

Price, Profit and Trade
Generally speaking, an item is worth more in an area to which it must be imported.
In Arms of Legend the price for all equipment is the small city price. The Price Factor
noted in the Settlement Table on page 38 is the multiplier applied to the standard price
quoted for any piece of equipment or service detailed in this book. Of course, this level
of inflation is not consistent and depends on availability of goods; some items may be
cheaper in a large city than a smaller one, depending on resources, and therefore the
Price Factor should be used as a guide by Games Masters rather than a hard and fast
rule. For instance farm animals and the like are much less expensive in rural areas,
where they are plentiful, than they are in a major city.

Barter

Expect coinage to be used in civilised cultures, but in barbarian, primitive and nomad
cultures, barter – the cross-trading of goods, services and favours – is far more common.
The success of bartering depends on tendering something the other party wants or
needs in exchange for what is on offer. A civilised Adventurer in a barbarian stead may
proffer coins in exchange for food, but coins do not necessarily offer any immediate
advantage to the provider. Therefore to barter successfully, the Adventurer must have
something tangible that he can offer that can be put to (relatively) immediate use.
Like-for-like usually works well. An Adventurer who seeks some food and has some
drink to offer in return is likely to be met favourably. Services may also suffice: offering
to chop wood for a morning in exchange for a bowl of stew, for example. More complex
or specialised goods are services are less likely to succeed - unless the Adventurer can
convince the other party of the need and utility.
To abstract the barter process use the following rules:
•	
•	

The Adventurer must make an offer of something: goods or service. If this is a
common commodity or an essential service that is obviously going to be of benefit,
then the barter succeeds.
If the Adventurer is intending to offer something less common, of less obvious
value or something esoteric, then he may make an Evaluate roll. If successful, he
has spotted a way of selling-in what he offers that is not obvious to the other party.
This grants a bonus to the following roll: either Influence or Commerce.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

41

Bartering Evaluate
Evaluate Level of Success
Critical
Success
Failure
Fumble
•	
•	

Influence Bonus
+20%
+10%
0
–20%

Commerce Bonus
+40%
+20%
0
–10%

Next the Adventurer makes either an Opposed Influence or Commerce roll,
whichever is higher. The other party resists with either his Persistence or Commerce,
again, whichever is higher.
If the Adventurer wins the Opposed roll, what he offers is accepted. If he fails, it
is not. If the Adventurer fumbles the opposed roll, then there is a good chance he
has insulted the other party, meaning that relations between them will be soured:
precisely how depends on the circumstances.

Haggling

Haggling is the art of reducing the asking price to a more agreeable amount. A skilled
negotiator can achieve substantial discounts through careful haggling.
The process works in the same way as for Bartering: an Evaluate roll followed by an
Opposed Influence/Commerce roll against Persistence/Commerce. The outcome of
the roll determines what the Adventurer, whether buying or selling, achieves:
Haggling Outcome
Haggling Level of Success
Critical
Success
Failure
Fumble

Negotiated Price
Half of the original price
Three quarters of the original price
No reduction in price
No Trade

Making, Repairing, Maintenance and Quality
Items available on the standard Legend equipment lists are assumed to be of average
quality – they get the job done but are not anything special. Whether a sword was
crafted by a smith with a Craft skill of 50% or 300% makes little difference in this
case. As long as the blade is long, solid and sharp, the sword functions as it is supposed
to, it is considered to be of standard quality. The sword made by the better smith may
have a bit more intricacy in the hilt, may hold an edge a little better or possess a more
comfortable grip, but in game terms the blade is effectively identical to that made by
the lesser smith.

42

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Making, maintaining or repairing anything properly requires certain essentials:
•	
•	
•	

The skills to do the job – typically a Craft skill, Engineering or Mechanisms.
Tools and Resources – including labour (skilled and unskilled), workshops, and so forth.
Time.

Skills

The following Advanced Skills are used in building, repairing and maintaining.
Craft – to manufacture, maintain and repair items that typically have no or few moving
parts: armour, clothing, pottery, weapons and so forth.
Engineering – to manufacture, maintain and repair large structures and, (typically)
machinery with several moving parts.
Mechanisms – to manufacture, maintain and repair small items with several moving parts.
Some overlap naturally occurs between these skills: one could use Craft (Clockmaking)
or Mechanisms to make and repair a pocket watch or clock; similarly, one could
employ Engineering or Mechanisms to build a siege catapult. In most cases the most
appropriate skill to use is obvious but where it is case of either/or, then Adventurers can
use whichever skill is highest. Games Masters may apply a modifier of between –10%
and –60% depending on how appropriate the skill is to the task at hand.
Item Quality
Total Score Result
175 - 200
A perfect, masterly job. The item benefits from 3 Enhancements (see
Enhancements).
150
A superb job. The item benefits from 2 Enhancements (see
Enhancements).
125
An excellent job. The item benefits from 1 Enhancements (see
Enhancements).
100
A perfectly serviceable, acceptable product or job, that does what it is
intended to do.
75
A reasonable, but flawed result. The item will break or wear out 25%
quicker than normal or its Hit Points and value are reduced by one
quarter reflecting its flawed durability.
50
A poor, flawed result. The item will break or wear out 50% quicker
than normal or its Hit Points and value are reduced by one half
reflecting its flawed durability.
25
A shoddy, botched piece of work. The item will break or wear out
75% quicker than normal or its Hit Points and value are reduced by
three quarters reflecting its shoddy durability.
0 or less
The project is simply not finished and is unusable.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

43

Tools and Resources

One cannot build a solid bridge if no wood, metal or stone is available. A blacksmith
cannot fashion a horseshoe without iron, an anvil, a forge and so on. The availability
of tools and other resources (such as water, skilled or unskilled labour and so forth)
determines a number of things:
•	
•	
•	

Whether the task as at hand is possible or not.
How long the task takes to complete.
The quality of the finished work.

Each of these must be weighed against the circumstances. For example, if a blacksmith
has iron, tools, forge and anvil, he can certainly make that horseshoe. However, if the
tools he works with are of poor quality, then making a horseshoe might take longer
and be of a lower quality than if he had the best tools to work with. Similarly, if the
blacksmith has everything he needs and of good quality, an impatient noble wanting
the job done in half the usual time means that the end quality might also be lacking.
All these conditions can be considered to be cumulative. Thus, if the task at hand is
clearly impossible in the first place (making a stone bridge where there is no available
stone) then the task’s duration and the available tools are academic. If the blacksmith
works with sub-standard implements and in a hurry, then the chance of a quality
product is doubly compromised. How these elements come into effect is discussed in
Tasks.

Tasks

Building or repairing something always takes time and this is measured in the Task
Round. The length of a Task Round depends on the nature of the project and represents
an amount of time, ranging from seconds through to years, necessary for completing
a particular stage of a project. A range of sample tasks and Task Rounds is given in
the table below. The table notes the activity, the most appropriate skill or skills for
accomplishing it and the time unit for the Task Round.
Task
Repairing torn clothing

Appropriate Skill
Craft (Sewing)

Task Round Unit
5minutes – 1 hour

Forging a horseshoe

Craft (Blacksmith)

Making a sword
Building a Wooden or
stone Structure
Making a clock

Craft (Sword or Weaponsmith)
Engineering

5 minutes – 30
minutes
1 days – 5 days
6 months – several
years
1 month

Mechanisms

To complete a task, the person(s) involved makes a roll against the appropriate skill and
notes the level of success. Each roll contributes a certain percentage to the overall result
with the goal being to score 100% or higher.

44

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

•	
•	
•	
•	

Critical: 50%
Success: 25%
Failure : 0%
Fumble: –25%

Rolls are made until either 100% (or more) is reached, or the available time or budget
is exhausted.
Each roll consumes one Task Round, and it is the case for most projects that a competent
worker, not suffering any failures, will accomplish the task in four Task Rounds.
Reaching 100% indicates that the end result of a good standard. Anything less is substandard. If time is not an issue, then the worker can keep going until 100% is reached.
However, if time is of the essence, then each skill roll counts – and so will the quality
of the resources to hand.
The final percentage reflects the quality of the product or completed task.
For example, the blacksmith is ordered to make a new shoe for the horse of an impatient
nobleman. Ordinarily it would take the blacksmith 20 minutes to make a decent horseshoe
(representing four successful skills rolls, with five minutes for each roll). However, the
nobleman wants the job done in half the time. This means that the blacksmith has only two
Task Rounds to make and fit the shoe. He can do it to 100% if he critically succeeds in both
Task Rounds, but anything less results in an imperfect product.
On his first Task Round roll, the blacksmith rolls 35 – a success, and contributing 25% to
the result. On his second Task Round roll, he rolls 02 – a critical, and contributing 50%
to the result. So, in the time allotted to him, he achieves a score of 75% for the task. The
horseshoe is reasonable enough, but is unlikely to last the 350 kilometres a horseshoe normally
lasts for. Instead it will last for 25% less than this, so is good for only 260 kilometres or so:
either that, or the nobleman sees the flaws in the blacksmith’s work and only pays him three
quarters of the usual fee.
Circumstance Modifiers to Skills
The following modifiers, depending on circumstances,
Circumstance
No tools
Improvised tools
Poor Quality/Incomplete Tools
Lacking a crucial resource
Lacking a major resource
Lacking a minor resource
Good Quality tools

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Modifier
Task is impossible
–40%
–30%
–30%
–20%
–10%
+20%

45

Enhancements

Creating something to 100% creates a solid, working, functional item that may be
aesthetically pleasing on a basic level but is otherwise unremarkable. Creating things
that are truly remarkable – masterpieces and works of art – requires both luck, skill and
additional time.
If a project exceeds 100% in four or less Task rounds, it benefits from the number of
Enhancements noted in the Item Quality table. If a project reaches 100% in four or less
Task rounds, the maker has the option to continue refining it. To do this he continues
to work on it for a further Task Round and, depending on the result of the skill roll for
the Task Round, may enhance it.
Thus, a fumble actively overworks the item, taking away from its quality rather than
enhancing it.
•	
•	
•	
•	

Critical Success: 2 Enhancements
Success: 1 Enhancement
Failure: No Enhancements
Fumble: Reduce Quality by –25%

The Enhancement is determined by the make. Choose from the following:
Enhancements
Enhancement
Highly Desirable
Highly Durable
Highly Resilient
Highly Efficient
Highly Effective

Effect
The item’s value is doubled.
The item’s Hit Points are increased by half again.
The item’s Armour Points are increased by half again.
The item of such quality that it confers a +5% bonus to the
skill required to use it.
If a weapon it gains +1 to its Damage rating. Other items
reduce ENC value by 1D2 points.

Enhancements cannot stack: that is, different enhancements must always be chosen;
one may not pick the same enhancement to achieve multiple benefits.
For example, two weapon smiths are working on weapons for respective customers. Grunwold,
through good fortune and excellent tools and raw materials achieves a score of 150% in four
task rounds. Warleggan achieves 100% in the same time.
Grunwold can automatically choose two enhancements. He decided to make the sword Highly
Efficient and Highly Effective, giving it +5% to the Sword Combat Style and +1 Damage.
However the sword does not look appreciably different to a standard sword. If he wants to
charge more for it, then he must convince the client of its overall quality.

46

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Warleggan creates a
standard, functional
weapon but decides to
attempt to work on the
item a little further. He
scores a success in his
additional Craft (Weapon
Smith) roll and thus gains
one enhancement. He
decides to make the sword
shiny and intricate, thereby
doubling its value, but not
enhancing its durability,
efficiency or effectiveness in
any other way.
Evaluating Quality
Buyers of items use
the Evaluate skill to
identify any potential
enhancements. A
craftsman might claim
that a sword is sharper
and more efficient but
that does not make it
so. Similarly, a flashy,
jewel-encrusted sword
may simply glitter but
be no more effective in
combat than its drab
counterparts.
Successful Evaluate
rolls form the basis of
bartering and haggling,
as described earlier.
However, an Adventurer
that critically succeeds
in his Evaluate sees all
enhancements worked
into an item. A successful
roll identifies just one
– which is determined
randomly.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

47

ARMOUR
Armour’s necessity should be obvious. A layer of protective material reduces damage
sustained in combat, greatly improving the chances of survival. Even a single point
of linen or leather, in a strategic area like the head or chest, can make the difference
between a living Adventurer and a dead one.

Armour Types
Banded/Lamellar: Metal plates stitched to a leather backing and then overlapped to
resemble the natural armour of an armadillo. Banded has a certain flexibility but is still
heavy to wear.
Bezainted: Soft leather with metal discs stitched to it (resembling the bezant, a medieval
coin). It offers good protection but is nevertheless heavy to wear.
Bone: Crafted from the bone of a dead creature (such as a skull helmet), bone armour
is surprisingly durable and can take a significant amount of damage before yielding,
especially when backed with thick fur or leather for comfort and protection. Many
bone helms have skull-like faces or other horrifying visages, granting a +10% bonus
to Influence tests made to intimidate but suffering a –10% penalty to Influence tests
to persuade or charm those who might find the mask a bit imposing. A bone shirt or
skirt - made from lengths of rib-bone sewn together with leather cord or small brass
rings - is commonly seen in tribal societies or worn by those who want to give off an
image of barbarism. The bone shirt also grants a +10% bonus to Influence tests made
to intimidate but suffers a –10% penalty to Influence tests made to persuade or charm
those who might think the bone armour is savage.
Brigandine: Metal scales are sandwiched between layers of leather and held in place by
rivets. Strong and durable its rivets offer a more attractive finish than straightforward
metal armour.
Chainmail: Woven metal links which, whilst heavy, are flexible and more durable than
armour relying on a leather base.

48

Enamelled: Cast from either leather or tin before being painted repeatedly with stiff
resins and alchemical agents, enamelled armour is beautiful and resilient without being
too heavy. Due to its construction, it is always made in brilliant colours that strike the
eye from a great distance. Often used by generals, heroes and showmen, enamelled
armour is among the most attractive armour made. Every individual piece of enamelled
armour grants +10% to any Influence tests made toward onlookers, but also applies
that same bonus to any Perception tests made to spot the wearer.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Hard Leather: Strengthened hides and cured leather used for shields and body armour.
Hard leather is the consistency of shoe leather: hard wearing yet flexible.
Linen Cuirass: Similar to a heavy leather cuirass but the armour is crafted from
multiple layers of quilted linen. The thick, stiff fabric provides decent protection at a
fraction of the weight of other materials.
Plate: Made of moulded individual metal plates, this armour provides excellent
protection but is encumbering and comes with a heavy price tag.
Ringmail: Bronze or iron rings sewn onto a leather backing. Heavier than leather, but
affords much better protection.
Scalemail: Similar to Ring, but the rings are replaced with scales of metal which
overlap, like the scales of a fish or serpent.
Soft Leather: Armour made from cured hides – the simplest form of armour usually
found amongst primitive cultures but also worn in more cultivated styles where
protection is important but not necessarily an essential.
Wooden: This armour is carved from appropriately sized pieces of timber and generally
lacquered to improve its durability. What wooden armour lacks in flexibility, it makesup for in two other areas. First, attempting to Impale through wooden armour is
difficult – the Impale Combat Manoeuvre can only be chosen on a Critical Success
against an opponent clad in wood. The armour’s natural suppleness and ability to
absorb stabs and jabs means that the impaling chance is reduced. The armour is also
buoyant: someone falling into water wearing wooden armour will not sink, as they
would if wearing metal. Wooden armour must be carved by a suitable craftsman to fit
the wearer.
Armour is listed as the cost, in Silver Pieces, per location. Banded/lamellar, for example,
is priced at 800 SP per location. The Armour Pieces table then provides descriptions
for the different composite pieces of armour and the Hit Locations covered. Greaves,
for example, cover both legs.
The cost for a named piece, such as Pants, that cover several locations is calculated
per location. Banded Pants cover three locations and cost 2,400 SP. However, Game
Masters may, if they wish, allow a composite piece of armour covering two or more
locations to cost 10% less than the price per individual location. In the case of Banded
Pants, the cost would therefore be 2,160 SP.

Speciality Armour

The armour already described forms the basis for the most common armour types in
Legend. There are, however, certain specialised options as follows:
Archer’s Armlet: A stiffened piece of leather worn on the inside of the forearm of most
archers, protecting them from the bite of a slightly misfired bowstring.
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

49

Armour Types and Costs
Armour
Banded/Lamellar
Bezainted
Bone
Brigandine
Chainmail
Enamelled
Hard Leather
Linen
Plate
Ringmail
Scalemail
Soft Leather
Wooden

AP
3
3
2
7
5
4
2
2
6
3
4
1
3

Cost in Silver per Hit Location
800
200
300
1,500
400
1,600
100
75
1,200
200
250
50
350

ENC per Location
2
3
2
3
3
2
2
1
3
2
2
1
3

Armour Pieces Table
Name
Greaves
Pants or Trews
Skirt
Hauberk
Byrnie/Cuirass
Breastplate
Sleeves/
Vambraces
Coif/Hood
Coat
Helm

Hit Locations
Covered
Legs
Abdomen and
Legs
Abdomen
Chest and
Abdomen
Chest
Chest
Arms
Head
Chest, Arms and
Abdomen
Head

Type of Armour
All
Soft Leather, Hard Leather, Ringmail,
Scalemail, Chainmail, Banded, Bezainted
All
Soft Leather, Hard Leather, Ringmail,
Scalemail, Chainmail, Banded, Bezainted
Soft Leather, Linen, Ringmail, Chainmail,
Banded/Lamellar, Bezainted, Bone, Enamelled,
Plate, Wooden
All
Soft and Hard Leather, Ringmail, Chainmail
Banded/Lamellar, Bezainted, Soft and Hard
Leather, Ringmail, Scalemail, Chainmail
Banded/Lamellar, Bezainted, Bone, Soft and
Hard Leather, Scalemail, Plate, Wood

Crabclaw Gauntlet: A specialised tool for one-handed duellists, the crabclaw gauntlet
is a thick metal ‘glove’ that extends halfway up the arm, just like any other. The part
of this gauntlet that is exceptional is the single folded plate that houses the first two
fingers of the wearer’s hand. At the end of this thick finger-cuff is a latching mechanism
that clasps the cuff to a socket at the base of the thumb plating – creating a sort of claw
that holds any one-handed weapon firmly in its grip. Unless the gauntlet is actually
broken, the wielder will continue to grasp the weapon or item within. A crabclaw
gauntlet adds +50% to any tests used to resist being disarmed or having the clutched
item taken from the gauntlet. It takes two Combat Actions to unlatch the glove.

50

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Specialised Armour
Armour
Archer’s Armlet
Crabclaw Gauntlet
Duellist Half-cape
False Plate (breast and
back)
False Plate (suit)
Full Helm
Gauntlet, Heavy
Gauntlet, Light
Gauntlet, Medium
Gladiator Manica
Plated Cloak
Plated Coat
Tightweave Silk (suit)

AP
1
4
2
3

ENC
1
1
1
1

Locations
Arm (wearer’s choice)
Arm (wearer’s choice)
Chest, Arm (wearer’s choice)
Abdomen, Chest

Cost
100 SP
350 SP
400 SP
500 SP

3
6
3
1
2
2
3
3
1

2
2
1
—
1
1
3
2
—

All
Head
Arms
Arms
Arms
Arm
Abdomen, Arms, Chest, Legs
Abdomen, Arms, Chest
All

750 SP
1,400 SP
1,500 SP
500 SP
1,000 SP
350 SP
1,850 SP
1,500 SP
500 SP

Duellists Half-Cape: This is a length of flexible cloth that is often cut into a draped
cape of sorts that hangs over the chest and unused arm during a swordfight. A number
of stiff leather strips are sewn into the cape here and there, giving additional protection
to the areas they cover. The half-cape’s construction allows it to be twirled over one arm
or the other as a Combat Reaction. This adds the cape’s Armour Points to the covered
arm if desired. Also, if taken from around the chest and held in one hand, the half-cape
can be used like a buckler – offering no AP protection, but allowing a +10% bonus to
Parry Skill Tests.
False Plate (breast and back): Made for the Adventurer who wants the look of
expensive plate armour but not the cost, false plate is actually hard leather with a very
thin riveted sheet of metal on top of it. To the casual observer, the clever sculpting and
metallic sheen of the armour is likely to pass for the heavy and costly plate. Unless the
armour is damaged enough that someone can see through the thin metal, it is almost
indistinguishable (–25% to Perception tests) from normal plate armour.
False Plate (suit): This is a complete suit of the cunning false plate armour, cut and
fit to the wearer just as though it were real plate. At a glance it will fool nearly anyone,
as it has all the same rules as the false plate breast; however, it is considerably lighter
and does not clank and rattle quite the same. Someone fighting or running in a suit
of false plate reduces the penalty to onlookers’ Perception tests against discovering its
secret to –10%.
Gauntlet, Heavy: A hinged, segmented glove made of several metal plates folded to
fit the wearer, a heavy gauntlet completely eliminates the ability to manipulate objects
with any sort of manual dexterity but protects the hand and forearm against injury. As
a side note, the heavy gauntlet inflicts 1D4 bludgeoning damage if used to punch, but
suffers a –10% penalty when used to attack in such a manner.
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

51

Gauntlet, Light: Stiff leather with several sewn-in plates of metal, a light gauntlet
is a common sight in most societies. It offers a degree of protection to the hand and
forearm, with only a slight reduction in manual grace (–5% penalty to DEX-based
activities). The light gauntlet is also a good standby for a falconry glove, and many
falconers wear them for this reason alone.
Gauntlet, Medium: A medium gauntlet is a leather cuff with metal finger plates
sewn to a reinforced backing. It protects the wearer’s hand and forearm like any other
gauntlet, but tends to keep the best of both worlds in its construction. The penalty
to DEX-based activities is raised to –10% but the medium gauntlet offers greater
protection than its light counterpart.
Gladiator Manica: Worn by gladiators this is a chainmail sleeve that covers the
shoulder and arm completely, held in place by straps across the torso. Typically only
worn on one arm to keep the other free for weapon use.
Plated Cloak: This is a thick wool or leather cloak that has dozens of small metal plates
sewn inside the fabric. The plates make the cloak quite heavy, and the garment really
only protects from attacks occurring from behind unless fully wrapped around the
wearer, but it offers a considerable amount of protection. It takes a Combat Reaction
to don the cloak (so long as the wearer has an open hand), and he cannot attack while
doing so.
	
Plated Coat: This heavy leather coat has a high collar and tails that drop well past
the waist to just above the knee, hemmed sleeves with buckles and pockets in several
places. On the inside lining, which is commonly made of moleskin or soft leather, are
several metal plates placed in key places (over the heart, kidneys, neck and so on) that
absorb a good amount of damage when attacked. The coat is heavy, but some prefer it
to heavier armour, as it takes half the time to put on or take off than a normal armour
shirt or breastplate.
Tightweave Silk (suit): Also nicknamed ‘assassin’s armour,’ the tightweave silk suit
is a head-to-toe dyed-black silken bodysuit woven over a thin layer of treated leather.
While it only offers the tiniest amount of protection from physical harm, it offers it
to the entire body of the wearer – including the head, which is protected by a closeddrawn hood. Due to the nature of the armour, however, it does not pose any Skill
Penalty. Contrarily, it adds +10% to the wearer’s Stealth score due to the quiet and dark
design of the suit.

Modifying Armour
The following is a list of modifications that a qualified armoursmith could make
to individual pieces of armour. These modifications are not simple for even master
smiths and can use up massive amounts of time and money. Even the most trivial of
modifications requires the smith to take the armour completely apart to be adjusted.
Like modifying weapons, there is always a risk to the structural integrity of the armour
and much of the time it is too expensive to experiment with.

52

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Armour Modifications
Average Time of
Modification Modification
Bladed
1D4 days
Camouflaged 2D10 hours
Reinforced

1D6 weeks

Spiked
Wintered

1D4 days
2D8 hours

Modification
Restrictions
Arms and Legs only
None
Abdomen, Arms,
Chest and Legs only
None
None

Difficulty Cost
–5%
300 SP
+10%
x2 of base
armour value
–20%
x5 of base
armour value
–5%
250 SP
—
150 SP

The Armour Modifications table shows the names of possible modifications, how long
the process typically takes, any restrictions, the difficulty of the modification and the
cost. A detailed description of each modification and an example of how it would look
and affect a given piece of armour follows.
Bladed: Riveting or forge-welding thin blades to forward pointing areas of the armour
segment (foot, knee, back of hand and so on) gives the wearer an additional weapon
that cannot be removed using the Grab Weapon Combat Manoeuvre. This blade is
positioned to be used with a normal Unarmed attack, which is considered to be a
dagger for the purposes of damage. These blades add +1 to the ENC of the armour.
Camouflaged: Painting the armour with dyes, inks and strips of canvas to match the
surroundings requested by the buyer, the armour can be made to be easily hidden in
those surroundings. Each Hit Location that is covered by Camouflaged armour adds
a cumulative +5% bonus to any Stealth Skill Tests made to hide in a surrounding
matching the camouflage pattern. It is up to the Games Master to decide if the
surroundings match but armour can only have one type of Camouflage at a time.
Reinforced: An armoursmith can always add metal strips to existing armour to
bolster its protective nature. Leather can be plated over, chainmail can be wired with
thick spools of metal and even plate can be thickened. These modifications make the
armour more durable and resistant to damage, but also make it far heavier and bulky.
Reinforcing armour adds one Armour Point to it but makes it half-again (round up)
its normal ENC. The Armour Penalty naturally increases if the armour is reinforced.
Spiked: Adding long spikes to specific areas of armour can make any style of armour into
a risky proposition for opponents relying on Unarmed and natural attacks. Anyone that
strikes a section of the body covered by a spiked armour segment with his bare flesh will
suffer 1D3 damage. Also, grappling with or being grappled by someone who is wearing
spiked armour segments will inflict 1D4 damage each round to a random Hit Location.
Spiking armour adds 1 ENC worth of spikes and rivets to the weight of the armour; it also
increases the Armour Penalty by 1 – even though the armour itself gains no additional AP.
Wintered: Adhering thick leather or furs to all of the spaces in normal armour, an
armoursmith can insulate any armour against the bitter cold and stiff wind of winter
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

53

or mountaintop travels. This makes the armour entirely uncomfortable to wear in
any other climate, and very heavy and unwieldy, but can make all the difference in
such harsh environments. Wintering armour makes it very warm and snug, granting
a +15% bonus to any Survival and Resilience Skill Tests against extreme cold or
winter-like conditions. However, its ENC and Armour Penalty are raised by 1. Also,
wearing the armour in any moderate or warmer temperature causes a level of Fatigue
every hour the wearer is clad in the wintered armour.

The Armour Modification Process

An armoursmith making modifications to an armour segment must spend the allotted
time doing the work in a proper forge or workshop, suffering severe penalties for trying
to do them outside of such environments (–20 to –50% commonly). Once the time
has been spent doing the work required, the armoursmith makes the adjusted Craft
(Armourer) skill roll. The outcomes of possible results of that Skill Test are below.
Critical Success: The modification went smoothly, and the armoursmith was able to
do some additional adjusting as he went along. Any additional increase in the armour’s
Armour Penalty is negated.
Success: The modification is complete and all the bonuses and penalties described
above are applied.
Failure: The modification is more time consuming than first thought. The modification
process must be repeated in order to finish it.
Fumble: The modification process was too invasive or sloppy and the armour segment
has suffered some form of damage. Not only must the process be repeated in order to
finish the modification, but the wearer suffers an additional 1 point Armour Penalty
due to a lack of comfort and other restrictions owing to the poor workmanship.

Alternate Armour Materials

The Alternate Armour Materials table shows a variety of alternate materials that have
interesting effects upon armour. The table shows the material, the modifier to Craft
Skill Tests trying to make armour from it and the suggested cost multiplier involved. It
should be noted that some of these materials may not be available in all cultures, game
settings or campaigns – that is ultimately up to the Games Master.
Coral: The building blocks of some of the largest and most impressive undersea
constructions, coral is jagged, sharp and able to withstand the crushing force of the
tides. Of course, it makes above adequate armour. Not only does it come in a variety
of colours and textures, it is very durable and must be chiselled very specifically in
order to make armour. Users beware, however, as it is very porous and seems to absorb
and hold water quite easily. Although only available in areas near an ocean shore or
island community, coral is plentiful where it can be found at all – making it a rather
inexpensive (relatively speaking) material.

54

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

+1 AP is added to armour made from coral or containing coral parts. Coral armour is
always considered to have the Spiked modification, but must triple its ENC whenever
significantly wet (hard rain, swimming and so on). Only armour types with rigid pieces
(scalemail, banded, plate and so on) can be carved or sculpted from coral.
Dwarfen Cinder: Named after one of the most common blacksmith-centric races in
mythic lore, ‘Dwarfen’ cinder is really just armour made from over-tempered metal
ore. It is vastly heavier than common metals and alloys, and is very resistant to physical
damage. However, it is terribly brittle and has been known to shatter like glass when
struck just right.
Dwarfen cinder armour has a massive +2 AP bonus but doubles its weight in ENC. If a
Critical Hit is scored against Dwarfen cinder, there is a 15% of it shattering into useless
pieces. Only armour types with rigid pieces (scalemail, banded, plate and so on) can be
carved or sculpted from Dwarfen Cinder.
Elven Silk: ‘Elven’ silk is an extremely supple fabric that is interwoven with thinly spun
wires of copper or steel. This inner-weave makes it strong, flexible and resilient. Sheets
of the material have a glimmer and shine to them that can sometimes lend the belief
that Elven silk is somehow magical.
Elven silk has +1 AP and the Armour Penalty is reduced by 1. Only armour types with
large cloth or leather sections (leather, gladiator, capes and cloaks and so on) can be
tailored from Elven silk.
Gold: Soft as far as metals go, gold is not the best material for crafting battle-ready
armour. However, its very existence symbolises wealth and nobility and shines like the
light of the sun itself. It is very costly to make any sort of armour segment out of gold,
with most armourers viewing the use of gold for armour as an utter waste of good
resources.
Gold armour suffers a –1 AP penalty and doubles its ENC score due to its being so soft,
malleable and heavy. Wearers suffer an additional two point increase to the Armour
Alternate Armour Materials
Alternate Material Craft skill Modifier
Coral
–20%
Dwarfen Cinder
–15%
Elven Silk
+10%
Gold
–15%
Monster Hide
Varies
Steel
–10%
Wondrous Metal
–75%

Cost Multiplier
x2
x3
x5
x12
Varies
x4
x20 (and have materials on hand*)

* It is up to the Games Master to decide how much of a substance is enough to craft the
armour in question.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

55

Penalty. However, anyone clad in gold armour can add +5% per Hit Location to his
Influence skill. Any armour can have its plates, rivets or adornments made with solid
gold if the Games Master allows it.
Steel: Steel is an alloy of iron and either carbon, manganese, chromium, vanadium,
or tungsten. Steel is harder and more durable than iron but require different smelting
techniques to create which may not be known in all cultures. The process for creating
steel is reflected in its x4 Cost Multiplier.
Items made from steel gain +1 AP. There is no increase in ENC.
Wondrous Metal: Wondrous Metal is any special metal found in a particular settings
that has incredible natural properties because it is of divine origin say, or originates on
a plane where incredibly strong and durable metals are found. Mithril, for example, is
an example of a wondrous metal.
Wondrous metals create items that have +1 AP and +1 HP. There is no increase in
ENC. The names of wondrous metals are for Games Masters to create for their settings
and may be relatively common or not even exist at all.

Creature Hide Armour
The Monster Hide Armour table displays the difficulty and skills needed to transform
the hide of a freshly killed beast into a new suit of armour for an Adventurer to wear, as
well as the final statistics of that armour. As including a separate entry for each creature
that might potentially be made into armour would make for a long and cumbersome
table, individual entries for each creature are excluded in favour of grouping them by
the resiliency of their natural armour. AP 6 to AP 9, for example.
If a hide is to be made into armour, it must be harvested from the carcass and
prepared within 48 hours of the creature’s death. Generally, this requires a normal
Craft (Leatherworking) Skill Test, though the Games Master may assign a penalty for
particularly odd beasts. Adventurers may also attempt to successfully (and properly)
harvest a beast’s hide with a Hard (–40%), Lore (Animal) or Survival Skill Test.
Some creatures’ hides may not be suitable for use as armour, no matter how tempting
they may seem to an Adventurer. For example, the hide of a behemoth is nearly
impenetrable. However, the behemoth does not gain this amazing AP from having
skin as hard as a diamond. Certainly, its hide is tough, but it gains much of its AP due
to the fact that its hide is also nearly 30 centimetres thick. Obviously, it is possible
to make armour from a behemoth’s hide, but the average human would be virtually
unable to move in something so cumbersome. Likewise, the Games Master may wish
to rule that the hides of some creatures simply cannot be made into armour. In general,
creatures with a natural AP greater than 25 are unsuitable candidates for harvesting
armour from, as they usually gain these high APs from some factor other than simple
toughness of their skin.

56

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Monster Hide Armour
Natural AP
of Creature
1-5
6-9
10-13
14-17
18-19
20-21
22-23
24-25
+5

Armour
AP
1-2
3-4
5-6
7-8
9
10
11
12
+1

Craft
Penalty
–0%
–10%
–20%
–30%
–50%
–100%
–150%
–200%
–50%

Time
Required
2 days
5 days
10 days
20 days
30 days
60 days
90 days
180 days
+90 days

ENC (head/
per arm/per
leg)
½ ENC
1 ENC
1½ ENC
2 ENC
2½ ENC
3 ENC
3½ ENC
4 ENC
+½ ENC

ENC
(abdomen/
chest)
1 ENC
1 ENC
2 ENC
3 ENC
4 ENC
5 ENC
6 ENC
7 ENC
+1 ENC

Sale Price
(by armour AP)
150 SP per AP
175 SP per AP
500 SP per AP
750 SP per AP
750 SP per AP
1,500 SP per AP
2,500 SP per AP
5,000 SP per AP
+2,500 SP per AP

An Adventurer can wear armour made from a creature of no less than double his own
SIZ. If the creature has a SIZ less than that, it may still be made into armour, but may
only cover a limited number of Hit Locations . If a creature has a magical ability of some
kind invested in its skin, that ability does not remain in armour constructed of its hide.
The type of armour a creature is made into depends primarily on what sort of creature
it was in life. Animals with a pliant skin, for example, will be made into a hide armour
that approximates the movement of leather (though its properties may be different).
Armour made from a dragon or wyvern will most closely approximate scale mail in
appearance, while armour constructed from the chitin of a great insect will most closely
resemble plate mail.
Generally, armour crafted from a creature’s hide has a lower AP than the creature enjoyed
in life. However, some armourers of surpassing skill are able to preserve the creature’s
full AP in the armour they craft, substituting the rigidity of the creature’s musculature
with their own preservation processes. Obviously, such armourers are rare and difficult
to find, although someone with a dragon hide who wishes to have the creature’s entire
AP preserved in armour may be willing to put in the effort. Finding someone able to
perform such work should be a Quest in itself. In general, however, armour crafted from
a creature’s hide will have half the AP the creature had when alive. The values reflected
on the Monster Hide Armour table assume the final product will indeed have half the
creature’s AP. If the Games Master wishes to allow for ‘full AP’ armour to be made, the
craft penalties, time required and sale price should go up dramatically.
Armour Wear Values
Original
AP Value
1-2
3
4-5
6-10
10+

Protected
Wear
AP x10 weeks
AP x20 weeks
AP x30 weeks
Unlimited
Unlimited

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Basic Wear
AP x5 weeks
AP x10 weeks
AP x20 weeks
AP x30 weeks
Unlimited

Common Wear
AP x2 weeks
AP x5 weeks
AP x10 weeks
AP x20 weeks
AP x30 weeks

Rigorous Wear
AP in weeks
AP x2 weeks
AP x5 weeks
AP x10 weeks
AP x20 weeks

Cost to
Repair
AP x2 SP
AP x5 SP
AP x10 SP
AP x25 SP
AP x100 SP

57

The costs on the table on page 57 should be considered to be small city and large city
costs. Armour crafted from the skin of some fantastic beast is generally far too exotic
to be found in a smaller population centre – and for those Adventurers interested in
selling such an item, it will be all but impossible to find an interested buyer amongst
the herders and farmers of the hinterlands.

Repairing Armour
Unless stated by a weapon, spell or environmental effect, armour does not suffer
massive amounts of structural damage from most sources. After all, it is designed to
protect the wearer and help shrug off damage. This means that all armour will slowly
weather and wear down over the weeks of its use and abuse, eventually requiring a
little repair here and there. As an Adventurer goes about his quests and adventures, he
will periodically need to repair or replace his armour or quickly find himself without
it. Armour damaged by the Sunder Combat Manoeuvre requires obvious attention to
repair it.
Depending on the Armour Points of the armour and the level of ‘wear and tear’ the
armour sees, it can go a number of weeks before even losing any of its efficiency. The
table shows the number of weeks an armour segment can go between repairs (varied by
degree of use), and roughly how much it should cost to do so.
Protected Wear: This level of wear defines armour in storage or on display, but not
actually being worn more than a few minutes a day. Also, to be considered ‘Protected’
it cannot see any form of combat.
Basic Wear: This level of wear defines armour that is worn for special occasions or while
on duty at a specific career. The armour can be worn only for a few hours a day at most,
and cannot be subjected to the punishments of combat without losing its ‘Basic’ status.
Common Wear: This level of wear defines a normal Adventurer’s life. Travel, all-day
wearing and the occasional bloody battle with the hazards of the quest at hand, these
are just some of the reasons an Adventurer must get his armour repaired from time to
time.
Rigorous Wear: This level of wear defines armour that is being really put to the test. Soldiers
that wear their gear day and night, Adventurers travelling in sandstorm-prone deserts and
armour that sees mythic combat every other day should fall into this level of wear.
Armour that goes too long without repairs might not withstand the rigours of combat
and become useless at the worst possible moment. It is up to the Games Masters to
decide exactly what happens when armour has gone too long without a maintenance.

58

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

WEAPONRY
Few Adventurers get far without a weapon of some kind. In many cultures weapon training
is a part of the formative years of every youth, even in civilised lands where people tend to
have greater isolation from environmental dangers than those of the other cultures.
So, this chapter details personal weapons: from knives through to polearms; slings
through to crossbows. All the weapons listed in the Legend Core Rulebook are present
and correct but supplemented by weapons from many different cultures and eras
allowing Legend Games Masters to bring these arms into play whatever historical
period is being tackled.

Close Combat Weapons
Close Combat weapons follow the Characteristics found in the Legend Core Rulebook,
having a series of attributes that determine and influence their use. These characteristics
are summarised in the Close Combat Weapons table; preceding that is a brief description
of the weapon itself. Read this description – it may contain important details that have
a bearing on skills, Combat Manoeuvres and so forth.
At the end of the chapter is a treatment of black-powder weapons: firearms. These
are not the sophisticated firearms of a modern period but the embryonic, somewhat
crude weapons such as muskets that mark the shift from traditional ranged weapons
to the beginnings of a certain degree of industrialisation. Just because these weapons
are listed and described does not mean they should be made available or used in all
Legend settings: in most published settings for the game they are eschewed. However,
Legend’s flexibility allows adventures to occur in any largely pre-industrialised era and
so their inclusion is there to assist with campaigns based in those eras where swords and
muskets do co-exist (a pirate campaign, for example, or the English Civil War).

Weapon Characteristics

Category: The type of weapon this is: one handed or two handed.
Damage Dice: The damage the weapon deals on a successful attack. If a weapon has
two Damage Dice entries, the first is for using the weapon one handed and the second
for two handed damage.
STR/DEX: The minimum STR and DEX scores needed to easily wield this weapon.
For every point a Characteristic is below these minimums, a –5% penalty is applied to
an Adventurer’s skill when attacking and parrying with this weapon.
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

59

Size: Each weapon possesses a size rating. This is related to its mass, leverage and
stability. The value is used to determine both the weapon’s ability to inflict and
parry damage. The size categories are Small (S), Medium (M), Large (L), Huge
(H) and Enormous (E).
Reach: The weapon’s length, how far it can reach in combat. The size categories are
Touch (T), Short (S), Medium (M), Long (L) and Very Long (VL).
Combat Manoeuvres: The Combat Manoeuvres a weapon can inflict – such as
Bashing, Impale and so forth.
ENC: The weight and bulk of the weapon.
AP/HP: The Armour Points and Hit Points possessed by the weapon. When Hit
Points reach 0, the weapon is broken and useless.
Cost: The average cost in Silver Pieces to purchase this weapon.

Weapon Descriptions

Archer’s Blade: A long sword-like blade fitted to the outside edges of any bow, the
archer’s blade allows a ranged combat specialist to have a potentially lethal weapon at
his disposal to defend himself when unable to draw another weapon. It adds its 1 ENC
to the bow, which also makes it slightly front heavy (–5% to Bow style).
Awl Pike: Nearly two-metres of shaft topped by a simple armour-punching head and
a body-catching crossbar, the awl pike is extremely useful for bringing armoured riders
off their mounts. By sinking the metal-capped butt of the pike into the ground just
before accepting a mounted charge, the target is impaled on the pike but held fast by
the crossbar – his mount running out from beneath him. Any charging mounted target
that is struck by the awl pike when set for a charge must make a make a Ride or Drive
roll opposed by the awl user’s Combat Style roll. If the rider loses the opposed test he is
thrown from the mount suffering any additional damage due to falling.
Ball & Chain: This heavy metal ball attached to a short length of chain is notoriously
difficult to parry. An opponent attempting to parry this weapon treats his parrying
weapon or shield as one step smaller for the purposes of blocking damage. However,
the wielder also suffers the same penalty when trying to Parry with the ball & chain.
Bastard Sword: The bastard sword is a versatile sword with an elongated grip, which
allows it to be used with either one hand or two. Any bastard sword can be fitted
with a widened set of pommel-guards, adding +5% to Parry Skill Tests with it, for an
additional 10 SP.
Battleaxe: A single-bladed weapon with a sturdy haft, the battleaxe may be used with
one or two hands, depending on the wielder’s preference. A battleaxe can be used to

60

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

bash through doors and obstacles rather quickly. It suffers no damage when attacking
inanimate wooden objects.
Bill: A polearm with a hooked blade, the bill descended (and was often recycled) from
a common agricultural implement. It is a very effective way of ‘hooking’ past defences,
thus a mounted defender does not get the standard +20% Parry bonus against a bill.
Broadsword: Similar in design and nature to a bastard sword, a broadsword has a
wider blade and is balanced to be used, primarily, one-handed – although it can be
used with two.
Buckler: This small, round shield is held in the hand, and used to ‘punch block’
incoming blows. Bucklers are often used to attack with the off-hand, when the main
weapon is tied up. Its small size however, provides little protection against larger
weapons or missile fire.
Burning Glove: This thick leather glove has an interior lining of fire resistant animal
hide and stone. Its surface is covered with sticky tar and a variety of reagents. As a
standard action the wearer may ignite the glove. The glove burns for three rounds.
During that time any unarmed attack made by the wearer causes an extra 1D3 damage
due to the flames. The wearer also takes one point of fire damage every round to the
arm where the glove is worn (ignoring armour). Each glove can only be used once.
Cestus: The cestus is a leather gauntlet spiked, studded and reinforced to cause terrible
wounds to a target that is punched with it. It makes the hand wielding it all but
useless to carry out any task other than hitting or pushing, and cannot be used for
Parry attempts. Few warriors choose a cestus over more traditional weaponry, but some
brawlers and sadists prefer it.
Chain: This two metre length of chain is one step above using an improvised weapon.
It is notoriously difficult to parry and imposes a –10% penalty to an opponent’s Parry
roll. However, the wielder also suffers a –10% penalty to Parry with this weapon. If an
opponent is caught by surprise, it can also be used as a garrotte (see entry on page 63).
Chakram: This is a wide ring of tempered metal that has been given a decent sharpening
over its outermost edge. It often has a crossbar or handle built into the centre to be used
as a combat weapon, or to enable the user to throw it without hurting an unprotected
hand. The chakram is designed to be thrown with blinding speed and can inflict terrible
wounds as it spins into bare flesh.
Club: Perhaps the simplest of all weapons and almost certainly the oldest, the club is
simply a long, stout piece of wood used to bludgeon others. However, there are several
cultures that have carved and cast clubs made of stone, bone or even metal – all of
which can be sculpted or decorated according to the wielder’s preference.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

61

Cutlass: The infamous pirate’s cutlass is a slightly curved, single-edged, mid-sized
sword with a basket hilt. It can inflict fast and flashing wounds but is not designed for
inflicting massive amounts of damage. Its basket hilt adds a +10% bonus to any Parry
Skill Tests made with the weapon.
Dagger: Essentially a large knife attached to a short handle, the dagger is often carried
as a backup or parrying weapon. Thieves, assassins and bandits often enjoy the use of
daggers because they can be hidden and drawn with ease. Daggers are usually wellbalanced enough to throw effectively.
Dart Blade: Either a wooden projectile tipped with a metal blade or a single-forged
metal throwing blade about the size of a man’s thumb, a dart blades is normally used
as a last ditch weapon. Dart blades are small enough to be hidden very simply and
offer a +10% bonus to Sleight tests in order to conceal them. They can be used in
melee combat if necessary, but are far more suited for throwing. Although unable to
inflict much damage individually, up to three dart blades can be thrown at a single
target in one Combat Action. When throwing multiple dart blades make a Combat
Style roll for each blade at a cumulative –10% penalty per additional blade above the
first. Dart blades can be Evaded or parried with a shield: if the Evade or Parry roll is
successful then all dart blades have been countered.
Dirk: This is a short-handled, wide-bladed weapon about half-again the size of a dagger.
It is commonly used as a secondary weapon, even though it promises sufficient damage
any time its blade bites flesh. Parrying with a dirk increases the damage blocked by one
step (i.e. it is treated as a Medium weapon when parrying).
Falchion: A single edged, cleaver-like sword that delivers heavy, chopping blows.
Fang Shield: A middle-sized shield shaped like an oversized arrowhead or spear tip,
the fang shield is so-named because it most commonly has two long spikes protruding
from its bottom. Worn lengthwise rather than sideways on the arm, the fang shield is as
much a stabbing weapon as it is a protective tool. As the shield must be secured firmly
to the arm, it is immune to the Grab Weapon Combat Manoeuvre.
Flamberge: A painstakingly forged sword with a swept and caged hilt, the flamberge
has an irregular and wavy edge to both sides of its blade. Not only able to deliver
significant blows, but also designed to deal with other sword wielders, the flamberge is
a favourite of duellists. The protective hilt adds a +10% bonus to the Parry Skill Tests of
the wielder. The specially designed blade rings against other swords with a particularly
odd vibration, making it difficult to hold a defence for long against a flamberge wielder.
Every time another sword parries a flamberge, its Parry skill is reduced by –5% for the
rest of the round.

62

Gaff: Another useful weapon that sprang from the likes of a tool, the gaff is a twometre long wooden pole with a curved metal hook and a spike at one end. It is often
wrapped in leather at the centre and was originally used for drawing rope up from the
surface of water onto the deck of a boat. Sailors quickly learned that the tool was just
as useful in hooking pirate flesh as well!

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Gandasa: An interesting variety of the great axe, a gandasa is a wooden shaft roughly
as tall as the user. Nearly half of its length is dominated by a huge polished blade.
Originally used as an executioner’s beheading axe, the gandasa is very top heavy and
inflicts horrible wounds against prone targets. Should the target of a gandasa strike be
held in place and unable to parry, the weapon inflicts an additional 1D6 damage from
the forward momentum of the attack.
Garrotte: An assassin’s weapon, the garrotte is a cord, chain or thin braided metal
wire used to loop around a target’s neck and strangle him. Only usable during a
grapple or from behind on an unsuspecting victim, the garrotte inflicts its damage
each and every Combat Action the wielder continues to actively crush his victim’s
throat. Whilst being strangled, the victim can attempt to wrestle free, or damage his
opponent so badly they are forced to let go – but acts at a penalty due to the strangler
being directly behind him.
Glaive: A chopping blade mounted on a polearm shaft, the glaive is like an extended
axe with a reinforced handle. It is one of the quintessential polearms and the favourite of
infantry soldiers. Some glaives can be fitted with a spear or awl pike head by adding half
that weapon’s cost to the glaive – effectively making the weapon into two, depending
on which end is put to the enemy.
Great Axe: Up to two metres in length, dwarfing the battleaxe in size, the great axe may
be either single or double-bladed and must be used with both hands. It also suffers no
damage when used to break inanimate wooden objects.
Great Club: Little more than a massive trunk of wood banded in metal, a great club is
much less a designed weapon as it is a makeshift one. Some cultures might create their
own varieties of stone or other materials, but overall the great club is the weapon of
choice for low-intelligence, low-resource beings of massive strength and size.
Great Hammer: The great hammer, or maul, is an enormous weapon that deals impressive
bludgeoning damage. It is both a tool and a weapon, and can sometimes be found with a
pick-like spike on the back portion of its head. Great hammers may be used on inanimate
objects without being destroyed.
Great Sword: This group nomenclature pertains to a number of massive blades that
can be found as much as two metres in length. They are used by those warriors who
want the enemy at more than arm’s length, or cleaved beneath the sheer girth of the
weapon’s strike. Part of the blade is unsharpened and leather-bound on many great
swords, allowing the wielder to grip them for more effective parries and thrusts.
Halberd: An axe head combined with a thrusting tip and a hook, mounted on a spear
shaft, the halberd is a multi-purpose weapon. Halberdiers are versatile opponents that
can bring any version of the weapon’s attack to bear in an instant.
Harpoon: A slightly shortened longspear with a sharp bladed head serrated with rearfacing hooks, the harpoon is another boatman’s tool turned into ship defence weapon.
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

63

Its sharp head was built to slice through bony fish or whale blubber equally well and
sets extremely well when plunged into a target. Not only can the harpoon be used in
fishing, adding +10% to any Survival Skill Tests used to catch fish in such a manner
but any target hastily removing an Impaled harpoon suffers an additional 2 points of
damage from the rear-facing barbs.
Hatchet or Hand Axe: A simple and very cheap one-handed cleaving weapon, the
hatchet is essentially a smaller version of an axe. It is as much a tool as it is a weapon,
and can be used to cut through wooden inanimate objects with no risk to its edge. It
is usually well-balanced enough to throw effectively and many users prefer to call these
items ‘throwing axes’.
Heater Shield: A medium sized shield designed for both mounted and foot use. Most
are reinforced with metal edging and commonly have some form of symbol or insignia
painted on the outside face. Heater shields can parry ranged weapons.
Heavy Mace: In Legend the Mace refers to a light mace, which has its own entry in the
weapon table. A heavy mace is a longer, heftier variant designed to be used two handed
to batter through even the heaviest of armour. The heavy mace is comprised of a large
weight mounted on one end of a haft and reinforced with heavy bands of metal to keep
the weight from snapping the shaft.
Hoplite Shield: Large circular shields designed for foot combat, which are edged
and sometimes faced with metal. This shield is an excellent defence against even two
handed weapons and provides decent cover against missile attacks.
Iris: Named for the flower, an iris is a small, handheld dagger-like weapon forged
with a slight curve – which slightly resembles a petal from its namesake. The curve
of the blade makes it difficult to forge without seeking a master smith and robs it of
the aerodynamics found in a dagger. Instead, when stabbing a target with an iris, the
weapon digs in at an angle – allowing for deep and painful wounds.
Katana: The Japanese sword of the Samurai, a katana is a slightly curved, single edged
sword made using ancient and special techniques. The katana is a viciously sharp
weapon that can slice through flesh like a razor. With a longer hilt wrapped in cloth or
leather, the katana is traditionally used with two hands. Although vicious when striking
flesh, armour holds a problem for the easily deflected edge of folded blades, meaning
that any target struck gains a +2 bonus to its non-natural Armour Points against katana
attacks.
Khopesh: A strange and fabulous sword, the khopesh has a sickle-like blade with its
outside curve bearing the edge of the weapon. The shape of the weapon makes for
heavier blows but at the expense of the blade’s speed. Therefore, all attacks and parries
made by the khopesh are at –5%.
Kite Shield: Kite shields are large shields with an inverted teardrop shape. This shield
can switch between both infantry and mounted use, and is extremely popular for those

64

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

who spend time in both types of combats. Kite shields are also effective against ranged
weapons.
Knife: Knives can be made from a sharp piece of metal, stone, bone or even glass.
They almost always have a short hilt carved from wood. More commonly a tool than a
weapon, the knife is a multi-purpose item that should be found in every Adventurer’s
backpack.
Knuckledusters: The term ‘knuckledusters’ describes a large category of metallic
bands, spikes, rings or blocks worn around the fingers in order to cause more damage
when punching. Knuckledusters are commonly found in the pockets of thugs and bar
room brawlers.
Kris: Most commonly used by priests and ritualists in their ceremonies, a kris – or kris
knife – is a fancy blade forged with waved edges and an asymmetrical hilt. It is not
designed specifically for combat, and suffers a –5% to all Parry rolls, but can inflict
deep wounds.
Kukri: A wide, forward curved blade made for chopping; the kukri has a single wedgelike edge used for cutting very deep gashes in flesh and bone. Similar to an axe in how it
strikes, the kukri is traditionally used for removing limbs or beheading targets in single
strokes. Should a kukri strike a target that is prone or utterly unaware of the attacker,
the attack inflicts an additional 1D3 damage.
Kunai: Originally used as a peasant digging tool, the kunai is a roughly triangular
piece of wrought metal with a rope or cloth wrapped handle. Usable as a dagger in
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

65

close combat, or as a thrown projectile, the kunai is a multi-purpose weapon for
commoners.
Lance: An oversized spear designed to be used from the back of a mount, a lance can be
a devastating weapon when charging. A mounted Adventurer who uses a lance during a
charge may add his mount’s Damage Modifier instead of his own to the damage.
Light Mace: The mace is comprised of a large flanged or knobbed weight mounted on
one end of a haft, which is often reinforced with metal. Its ability to incapacitate, even
heavily armoured opponents, makes this a popular weapon in civilised cultures. Note:
this is the equivalent of the Mace found in the Legend Core Rulebook.
Long Spear: The long spear is a lengthy piercing weapon, often used in ranked units
to defeat charging cavalry.
Longsword: The longsword is a versatile sword with an elongated grip, which allows it
to be wielded with either one hand or two. Its extra length adds to its reach, and used
two handed it inflicts greater damage.
Lucerne Hammer: This heavy weapon has a weighted pick-hammer head attached to a
reinforced polearm shaft. Its chisel-like spike punches through thick plate armour with
ease, rending flesh and organs to ruin in a single stroke. It is thick-handled and very
front heavy, imposing a –10% penalty on Parry attempts with the weapon. However,
the weapon ignores 1 point of non-magical AP with each strike.
Main Gauche: Also called a ‘parrying dagger’, the main gauche is a long-bladed dagger
with two extremely long and strong quillions. It is normally used in the off-hand in
conjunction with a longsword, rapier or sabre. Parrying with a main gauche increases
the damage blocked by one step (it is treated as a Medium weapon when parrying).
Mancatcher: The mancatcher is a stout rod of reinforced wood built with a springloaded claw at the end, triggered like a snare when thrust at a target. When used
properly, the mancatcher snaps closed around arms, legs, the neck or even waist of a
target with a SIZ of 15 or less, holding it at the mercy of the wielder. A mancatcher
can use the Grip manoeuvre usually reserved for unarmed attacks – and at a significant
Reach.
Military Flail: This is a heavy metal ball or rod, usually bristling with spikes or edged
flanges, attached to a wooden haft by a short length of chain. Due to its flexible
construction, an opponent defending against this weapon treats his parrying weapon
or shield as one step smaller for the purposes of blocking damage. However, the wielder
also suffers the same penalty when trying to Parry with the flail.
Military Pick: A thick-spiked metal head similar to a conical mattock attached to a
metal or wooden shaft, the military pick is designed to pierce heavy armour. Many
are built with spikes on opposite sides of the head, like those used by miners. Military
picks are very dense and tool-like, and may be used on inanimate objects without being

66

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

destroyed. A military pick ignores the first Armour Point of non-natural armour when
it strikes.
Moon Axe: A long haft topped with a blade shaped like a thick crescent moon, its
points outward, the moon axe is heavy and powerful when swung in a wide arc. Its
blade is exceptionally good at cupping around limbs or other extremities, lopping them
off in single strokes in many cases. A moon axe is not built for the defensive-minded,
and suffers a –10% penalty to any Parry attempts with it.
Morningstar: Carved from a length of wood nearly a metre long, the morningstar is a
bladed or spiked cudgel.
Naginata: This is a Japanese thick-hafted polearm with a curved, axe-like blade at its
very tip, often with a notched or wavy blade. It is traditionally decorated and polished,
making it as beautiful as it is deadly. Much like the more military halberd, the naginata
can be used like a chopping axe or a thrusting polearm, cleaving through targets easily
enough either way.
Net: Used by gladiators, huntsmen and watchmen, the net is more than a mere fishing
net to be tossed at a target. A fighter’s net is made of thick cord and leather, tipped with
numerous hooks and heavy weights. It can be swung like flail, the weights lashing out
to batter an opponent, inflicting the damage listed.
Ninja-to: The sword of the infamous Japanese ninja, this is a shorter, straight-bladed
version of the folded metal blade with a wider hilt guard. Just like its larger, curved
cousins such as the katana, the ninja-to has all the benefits and drawbacks of folded
metal blades, meaning that any target struck gains a +2 bonus to its non-natural
Armour Points against ninja-to attacks. Many ninja-to swords have hollowed hilts that
can hold a small (less than 1 ENC) item, and have their blades painted black with
grease or charcoal to decrease any shine.
No-Dachi: The Japanese great sword, the no-dachi is the largest of the folded metal
swords, and can be as long as two metres. It has a curved blade like its smaller brother,
the katana, and is a heavy weapon to use like a conventional sword. Requiring that the
user assume a low stance and set his hands wide on the hilt, the no-dachi can be thrust
forward at an approaching foe. This stabbing method is the no-dachi swordsman’s
answer to a lack of swinging room, or to the fast approach of cavalry. Just like its
smaller cousins, the no-dachi has all the benefits and drawbacks of folded metal blades,
meaning that any target struck gains a +2 bonus to its non-natural Armour Points
against no-dachi attacks.
Nunchaku: A nunchaku, which is two baton-like lengths of wood connected at one
end by a hand’s length of rope or chain, is a weapon for the fighter with agile hands.
Nunchakus are commonly used in quick strikes; the wielder lashes out with one side
or the other of the weapon, using momentum and speed to get past defences. A skilled
nunchaku user can attack from several different angles without so much as changing
his fighting stance, and land several blows in rapid succession. Attacks from nunchaku
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

67

are increasingly difficult to Parry, with a cumulative –5% penalty to the target’s Parry
skill per nunchaku attack in a single Combat Round. As well as imparting damage,
nunchaku can also be used to target an opponent’s arms or weapon and Entangle or
Disarm.
Poleaxe: A polearm about the height of a man, it has a hammer head backed with a
metal spike, and a spear tip for thrusting. This style of two handed war hammer is very
popular against heavy armour types.
Poniard: This duellist’s weapon is a long dagger, designed to be thrust into a target.
Quarterstaff: A simple staff, sometimes banded with metal at either end. In the hands
of a skilled user, it is a fast and effective weapon for both offence and defence, and can
be hidden in plain sight as a shepherd’s hook or simple traveller’s walking staff.
Rapier: Fast and light, the rapier relies more on the thrust than the slash. It is a
particularly effective weapon, especially considering its reach.
Rondel: The rondel is a knife named for its disc-shaped hilt guard and pommel, both
of which allow for added force behind stabbing thrusts. Most rondels have a longish
blade that is wide at the bottom and tapers to a point, although some may be rounded
at the tip. The rondel is a basic enough weapon that requires very little in the manner
of training or skill to use properly.
Sabre: The sabre is a slightly curved sword, designed to be used for slashing or thrusting
when mounted. It has a basket hilt which adds 1 Armour Point to the limb being used
to wield it.
Sai: Simple in design, the sai is a dagger-like weapon that does not actually carry an
edge except at the last bit of the tip of its three prongs. Unlike a knife wielder, a sai
fighter will only use the very tip of the central prong to drag shallow furrows in flesh
when slashing – though the weapon is far deadlier when driven deep enough into
the wound to sink the other two prongs into the target as well. When performing a
stabbing attack that is not Parried a sai fighter inflicts an additional +2 damage. Also,
the three-pronged design of the sai allows it to turn and capture bladed weapons.
Anyone using a sai is able to use the Pin Weapon Combat Manoeuvre without having
to score a critical success first.
Scimitar: A broad-bladed sword, the scimitar has a dramatically curved edge designed
for cutting and slashing. It is sometimes wider than a normal sheath can hold, and is
more often hung from straps or some form of netting.
Shillelagh: Unlike the standard club or cudgel, the shillelagh is a hand-carved or whittled
shaft of wood about as long as a man’s arm with an off-centred knot of shaped wood at the
end. The knot is sometimes heat-hardened and occasionally shaped into a beastly image or
design.

68

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Shortspear: Heftier than a javelin and fitted with a broader head made for stabbing,
a short spear is commonly used in conjunction with a phalanx of shields. The short
spear has been proved time and again as one of the most versatile weapons in existence,
though not necessarily the most powerful.
Shortsword: The shortsword is a straight, broad-bladed sword designed for thrusting.
It does carry an edge along its sides, but the edge is always secondary to the thrusting
point.
Stiletto: This is a thug or assassin’s choice of weapon. The stiletto is a small dagger
with a very thin stabbing ‘blade’ which is actually more of a spike. It is easily hidden;
granting a +15% bonus to Sleight Skill Tests to keep it concealed, and can puncture
thin armour very easily.
Tanto: The smallest of the folded metal blades, the tanto is slightly larger than a dagger
and comes in curved or straight-bladed varieties. It has a sharply angled edge to the
front, and is primarily a stabbing weapon – but is just as sharp as its larger cousins. It
is traditionally a weapon used to dispatch a fallen foe or comrade, or even oneself. Just
like its larger brethren, the tanto has all the benefits and drawbacks of folded metal
blades, meaning that any target struck gains a +2 bonus to its non-natural Armour
Points against tanto attacks.
Target Shield: A medium sized, round shield made of wood and covered with hide. A
target mounts a long spike on its central boss, making the shield a dangerous weapon,
as well as being able to parry ranged weapons.
Tetsubo: This Japanese weapon is attributed to large barbarians who once used sapling
trees to make it, as it is amongst the largest of the bludgeoning implements carried by
normal men. The tetsubo is a two metre long shaft of wood (or sometimes metal) that
is thin and leather-wrapped at the haft. At the opposite end it is often as thick as a man’s
leg, giving the whole weapon the appearance of a gigantic club. The entire length of the
weapon is then covered in strips of studded metal running lengthwise from the top to
the leather wrappings, adding weight and impact to the already huge weapon. Due to
its size, the tetsubo has a –10% penalty to Parry attempts made by and against it.
Tonfa: A simple baton with a crossbar, the wooden tonfa was originally used as a way
to augment monastic fighting styles without endangering the monks’ holiness by using
conventional weaponry. A tonfa can be spun rapidly around its crossbar, and can be
used for attacking rapidly and without relent.
Trident: Another tool turned weapon, a trident is a three-pronged or bladed spear
that once was used to catch fish in the same way as a harpoon. If a trident impales, its
barbed prongs do an extra one point of damage when being ripped free.
Tulwar: This is a larger version of the scimitar, with a truly massive and imposing blade
that requires two hands to heft and wield properly. It has a surprisingly small hilt for a
weapon of its size, and is generally wielded in a ‘laced-fingers’ or ‘hand-over-hand’ style
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

69

that makes it terribly difficult to do anything but attack– imposing a –10% penalty to
all Parry attempts made with it.
Wakazashi: A weapon of the Samurai, this is the ‘shortsword’ of the folded metal blades.
A wakazashi is the traditional secondary weapon of folded metal sword duellists. It is
not quite as long as a man’s arm, and has a slight curve to the blade that matches that
of a katana or no-dachi. Using a wakazashi is often viewed as a less honourable resort,
meaning that the wielder must have lost or broken his primary weapon if he draws the
wakazashi at all. Like other weapons of its kind, the wakazashi has all the benefits and
drawbacks of folded metal blades, meaning that any target struck gains a +2 bonus to
its non-natural Armour Points against wakazashi attacks.
War Gauntlet: The bigger and deadlier brother to the cestus, the war gauntlet is a fully
plated gauntlet covered on all sides by sharp spikes and small blades and topped with a
short row of longer blades or spikes. A single punch with a war gauntlet can ruin a large
section of a target’s flesh – most notably the facial features. As with a cestus, the hand
wielding the war gauntlet is all but useless, but its wielder is able to Parry normally.
War Maul: Originally meant as a tool for splitting wood or breaking stones, the maul
has a long history of use in warfare by peasants conscripted into service or oppressed
into revolt. A maul is a large hammer with a wooden head, usually bound in metal
bands to keep it from splintering. War mauls were originally intended for use on
inanimate objects and may still be used on such objects without being destroyed.
War Hammer: A weapon approximately the same size as a mace, the war hammer is
frequently seen amongst Adventurers. Most war hammers are tipped with a hammer
head and a metal spike, making them equally useful against flexible or stiff armour types.
War Sword: The most common sword types available, the war sword is generally
slightly less than a metre in length and possesses a sharpened tip to thrust with. It is the
ubiquitous weapon of choice amongst many adventurers.
Zweihänder: This is the larger, two-handed version of the flamberge. It has a very
distinct shape to its blade, and always has two very long quillions sprouting to the
sides of the hilt to make up for any difficulty the sword’s weight contributes to Parry
attempts. Like its smaller brother, the specially designed blade ‘waves’ ring against other
swords with a particularly odd vibration, making it difficult to hold a defence for long
against a zweihänder wielder. Every time a sword parries a zweihänder, its Parry skill is
reduced by –5% for the rest of the round.

Close Combat Weapon Modifications
The following is a list of modifications that a qualified weaponsmith could make to
Close Combat weaponry. These modifications are not simple and generally take a
great deal of time and money. There is always risk to the integrity of the weapon, and
a single slip of the weaponsmith’s hand could mean a broken blade or weakened haft.

70

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

1H & 2H

2H
1H & 2H

1H
1H
1H

1H
1H
1H
1H
1H
1H
1H
1H
1H
1H

Battleaxe

Bill
Broadsword

Buckler
Cestus
Chain

Chakram
Club
Cutlass
Dagger
Dart Blade
Dirk
Falchion
Fang shield
Flamberge
Gaff
Gandasa
Garrotte
Glaive
Great axe
Great club
Great hammer
Great sword
Halberd
Harpoon

1H
2H
2H
2H
2H
2H
2H
1H

Category
1H
2H
1H
1H & 2H

Weapon
Archer’s Blade
Awl Pike
Ball & chain
Bastard sword

Close Combat Weapons

71

1D6+1
1D6
1D6+1
1D4+1
1D2
1D3+2
1D6+2
1D6
1D8
1D6
2D6+1
1D2
1D8+1
1D12+2
2D6
1D10+3
2D8
1D8+2
1D8

1D3
1D3+1
1D4

Damage Dice
1D4
1D8+1
1D6+1
1D8+1
1D10
1D6+1
1D8+1
1D6+1
1D8
1D8+1

–/13
7/–
6/7
–/–
–/–
–/–
7/9
10/9
9/9
7/9
12/9
–/9
7/9
13/9
12/9
11/9
13/11
7/7
7/7

–/5
9/9
7/12

STR/DEX
7/9
9/5
9/11
13/9
9/9
11/9
9/9
7/9
14/9
11/9

S
M
M
S
S
S
M
L
M
M
H
S
M
H
H
H
H
L
M

M
S
M

L
M

Size
M
L
M
M
M
M

S
S
M
S
S
S
M
S
M
VL
L
T
L
L
L
L
L
VL
L

S
T
M

VL
M

Reach
M
VL
M
M
M
M

Bleed
Stun Location
Bleed, Impale
Bleed, Impale
Bleed, Impale
Bleed
Impale
Bleed, Impale
Entangle
Bleed, Sunder
Bleed
Bleed, Sunder
Stun Location
Stun Location, Sunder
Bleed, Impale, Sunder
Entangle, Impale, Sunder
Impale

Stun Location
Entangle

Sunder
Bleed, Impale

Bleed, Sunder (2H only)

Combat Manoeuvres
Bleed, Impale
Impale, Stand Fast
Entangle, Stun Location
Bleed, Impale

1
1
1
—
—
—
1
2
2
2
4
—
3
2
3
3
4
4
2

1
1
1

2
2

1

ENC
1
3
2
2

4/7
4/4
3/9
6/8
2/4
6/6
6/10
8/12
4/10
2/8
3/12
1/2
4/10
4/10
4/10
4/10
6/12
4/10
2/7

6/8
5/6
8/6

2/8
4/14

4/8

AP/HP
4/6
3/8
6/8
4/12

85 SP
5 SP
200 SP
30 SP
15 SP
50 SP
200 SP
175 SP
300 SP
25 SP
155 SP
15 SP
100 SP
125 SP
50 SP
250 SP
300 SP
250 SP
35 SP

50 SP
65 SP
10 SP

50 SP
275 SP

100 SP

Cost
75 SP
125 SP
250 SP
250 SP

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Category
1H
1H & 2H

1H
1H
1H
1H & 2H

1H
1H
1H
1H
1H
1H
1H
2H
1H
2H
1H & 2H

2H
1H
2H
1H
1H
2H
2H
2H

1H
1H & 2H

2H

Weapon
Hatchet
Heavy mace

Heater Shield
Hoplite Shield
Iris
Katana

Khopesh
Kite shield
Knife
Knuckledusters
Kris
Kukri
Kunai
Lance
Light mace
Longspear
Longsword

Lucerne hammer
Main Gauche
Mancatcher
Military flail
Military pick
Moon Axe
Morningstar
Naginata

Net
Ninja-to

No-Dachi

72

1D4
1D6+2
1D8+1
2D8+1

Damage Dice
1D6
1D8+1
1D10+1
1D4
1D4
1D4
1D10+1
1D12+1
1D6+2
1D4
1D3
1D4
1D4+1
1D6
1D3+1
1D10+2
1D8
1D10+1
1D8
1D10
1D10
1D4
1D4
1D10
1D6+1
2D6
2D4
2D8
10/11
10/9
7/9
12/10

STR/DEX
–/9
11/7
9/7
9/–
11/–/9
11/10
9/9
10/10
13/–
–/–
–/–
–/9
9/–
–/7
9/9
7/7
5/5
13/9
9/9
12/7
–/11
9/10
13/11
11/5
11/9
9/9
11/7

H

S
M

M
H
S
S
S
M
S
H
M
L
M
L
L
S
L
L
M
L
M
L

L
H
S
M

Size
S
L

L

L
M

M
S
S
T
S
S
S
VL
S
VL
L
L
L
S
VL
L
M
L
S
VL

S
S
S
M

Reach
S
L

Bleed, Impale

Entangle
Bleed, Impale

Bleed
Bleed, Impale
Stun Location
Impale
Bleed
Stun Location
Impale, Sunder
Stun Location
Impale
Bleed, Impale, Sunder (2H
only)
Impale, Sunder
Bleed
Entangle, Grip
Stun Location
Stun Location, Sunder
Bleed
Stun Location
Bleed, Impale

Bleed
Bleed, Impale

Combat Manoeuvres
Bleed
Stun Location, Sunder

3

3
1

3
—
3
3
3
3
2
3

2
3
—
—
—
1
—
3
1
2
2

2
3
—
2

ENC
1
3

5/12

2/20
5/8

4/12
6/7
4/10
4/10
6/10
3/12
4/10
4/12

3/10
4/18
5/4
3/2
3/6
3/7
4/4
4/10
6/6
4/10
6/12

6/12
6/18
4/3
5/10

AP/HP
3/6
6/10

650 SP

200 SP
450 SP

225 SP
180 SP
400 SP
250 SP
180 SP
250 SP
150 SP
300 SP

250 SP
300 SP
10 SP
20 SP
200 SP
125 SP
25 SP
150 SP
100 SP
30 SP
250 SP

150 SP
300 SP
65 SP
525 SP

Cost
25 SP
200 SP

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Category
1H
2H

1H
2H
1H
1H
1H
1H
1H
1H
1H
1H
1H
1H
1H
2H
1H
1H
2H
1H
1H
2H
2H
1H
2H

Weapon
Nunchaku
Poleaxe

Poniard
Quarterstaff
Rapier
Rondel
Sabre
Sai
Scimitar
Shillelagh
Shortspear
Shortsword
Stiletto
Tanto
Target shield
Tetsubo
Tonfa
Trident
Tulwar
Wakazashi
War gauntlet
War maul
War hammer
War sword
Zweihänder

73

1D4
1D8
1D8
1D4+2
1D6+1
1D4+1
1D8
1D6+1
1D8+1
1D6
1D3+2
1D4+1
1D6
2D8
1D4+1
1D8
2D6
1D8
1D4+1
2D6
1D8+1
1D8
2D6+1

Damage Dice
1D4+1
1D8+2
–/7
7/7
7/13
–/–
7/7
–/9
7/11
6/–
5/5
5/7
–/–
–/–
9/–
12/–
–/9
10/7
9/7
–/9
10/9
13/7
11/9
9/7
12/11

STR/DEX
7/13
11/9
S
M
M
S
M
S
M
L
M
M
S
S
L
H
M
M
L
S
S
H
M
M
H

Size
M
L
S
L
L
S
M
M
M
L
L
S
S
S
S
L
M
L
L
S
T
L
M
M
L

Reach
S
L

Combat Manoeuvres
Entangle, Stun Location
Impale, Stun Location,
Sunder
Bleed, Impale
Stun Location
Impale
Bleed
Bleed, Impale
Pin Weapon
Bleed
Stun Location
Impale
Bleed, Impale
Impale
Bleed, Impale
Impale
Stun Location
Stun Location
Impale
Bleed, Sunder
Bleed, Impale
Stun Location
Stun Location
Stun Location
Bleed, Impale
Bleed, Impale, Sunder
—
2
1
—
1
1
2
1
2
1
—
—
2
4
—
2
3
1
1
3
2
2
3

ENC
—
2
4/5
4/8
5/8
3/6
6/8
3/8
6/10
4/6
4/5
6/8
4/3
5/5
4/12
6/12
2/8
4/10
4/14
5/8
6/8
3/12
3/8
6/10
6/12

AP/HP
3/5
6/10
60 SP
20 SP
100 SP
40 SP
225 SP
125 SP
200 SP
40 SP
20 SP
100 SP
75 SP
250 SP
150 SP
200 SP
55 SP
155 SP
300 SP
425 SP
125 SP
150 SP
150 SP
175 SP
475 SP

Cost
110 SP
150 SP

The Close Combat Weapon Modifications table shows the names of these
modifications, how long they typically take, what sort of weapons may be modified
(at the Games Master’s discretion), the difficulty of the modification and the cost. A
detailed description of each modification and an example of how it would look and
affect a given weapon follows.
Banded: By riveting overlapping metal bands to the portion of the weapon that smashes
into an opponent, the weaponsmith adds more force to the blow. This process also
makes the weapon more durable, if also heavier. The weapon adds +1 to its damage,
ENC and HP.
Example: A newly Banded Target Shield inflicts 1D6+1 damage, has an ENC score of 3
and an AP/HP of 8/13.
Collapsible: This invasive modification actually cuts the weapon into a number of
pieces equal to its ENC, and places spiral-threading and pin-joints where the pieces
must be attached. This allows the weapon to be far more easily concealed or smuggled
in pieces but then assembled when needed in one minute per weapon section. This
modification makes the weapon itself easier to damage at these joints, reducing both
the weapon’s Armour Points and Hit Points by one each, to a minimum of one.
Example: A Collapsible Great Axe would break into two pieces (likely haft and head),
taking two minutes to assemble or dissemble, and would have a modified AP/HP of 3/9
when assembled.
Envenomed: A weapon can be modified to carry a number of doses of any poison or
toxin equal to the weapon’s ENC by drilling small rough-edged pockets in the damaging
portion of the weapon. This not only makes the weapon far deadlier, depending on
what the user wishes to place in the poison-pockets, but it also significantly weakens
Close Combat Weapon Modifications

74

Modification
Banded
Collapsible
Envenomed

Average Time of
Modification
2D2 days
2D6 days
1D8 hours

Hooked

2D2 days

Lightened
Reinforced
Serrated

1D4 days
2D6 hours
2D8 hours

Spiked

2D2 days

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Weapon Groups Available
Flail, Hammer, Shield
Axe, Hammer, Polearm, Spear
Axe, Dagger, Polearm, Spear,
Sword, Unarmed
Axe, Dagger, Flail, Hammer,
Polearm, Shield, Spear, Sword,
Unarmed
Anything 2 ENC or more
All Weapons
Axe, Dagger, Polearm, Spear,
Sword
Axe, Dagger, Flail, Hammer,
Polearm, Shield, Spear, Sword,
Unarmed

Difficulty
–10%
–15%
–10%

Cost
200 SP
350 SP
500 SP

–10%

200 SP

–25%
–5%
–15%

250 SP
100 SP
300 SP

–10%

200 SP

the blade – reducing the weapon’s Armour Points and Hit Points by 2, to a minimum
of 1.
Example: An Envenomed Ninja-to would be able to carry one dose of the user’s poisons but
would have an adjusted AP/HP of 3/6.
Hooked: Riveting or forge-welding a hook or set of hooks on the backside of any
bladed weapon can make it a very cruel implement. Although it slows the weapon’s
initial attack down considerably, reducing all attack rolls by –5% and initial damage by
–1 (to a minimum of one), it can cause considerable tissue damage if it is ever ripped
outward from a deep wound. This modification is only useful on weapons capable of
Impaling a target, but causes an additional die of damage (of the same type) if it is
Yanked free of an impaling wound.
Example: A Hooked Trident suffers a –5% to its attack rolls due to the large barbs on its
prongs and only inflicts 1D8–1 damage, but inflicts 2D8–1 damage when Yanked free from
an Impaled target!
Lightened: By drilling, cutting or sanding out areas of the weapon considered to be
‘non-essential’, the weaponsmith can reduce the weight of the weapon considerably.
This makes the weapon lighter and easier to wield and carry effectively but weakens
the weapon overall. The weapon can reduce its ENC score by one and adds +5% to
all attack rolls. However, both its Armour Points and Hit Points are reduced by 2, to
a minimum of 1.
Example: A Lightened Greatsword would weigh only an ENC of 3 and swing with a +10%
bonus to attack but only has an AP/HP of 4/10.
Reinforced: By adding plates, rings, bands or straps of metal and leather to the highstress areas of a weapon, the weaponsmith makes it far more durable and able to
withstand the rigours of being an Adventurer’s weapon. This adds 2 to the Armour
Points and 3 to the Hit Points of the weapon, but +1 to its ENC score. This new weight
slows reaction time, imposing a –5% penalty to all Parry tests made with the weapon.
Example: A Reinforced Lance has a mighty 6/13 in its Armour Points and Hit Points
respectively but suffers the –5% penalty to Parry attempts, and weighs a hefty 4 ENC.
Serrated: A modification generally sought by only the truly sadistic, angled ‘teeth’ can
be added to the blade of a weapon. This new and savage edge bites and saws into a
target as much as it cuts or stabs, inflicting terrible wounds. This modification not only
adds +1 to the damage it inflicts, but also causes any mundane healing skill attempts
on the wound suffer a –15% penalty. The serrated teeth do remove the weapon’s
integrity, reducing its Armour Points by one, to a minimum of one. These teeth are
also much easier to catch and parry away, granting enemy Parry attempts against it a
+10% bonus.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

75

Example: A truly wicked weapon, a Serrated shortsword inflicts 1D6+1 damage that cannot
be healed easily (–15 penalty) but can be parried +10% easier and only has an AP of 3
instead of its normal 4.
Spiked: Adding spikes to a weapon, even one that normally has spikes on it, can add
some significant damage potential to its attacks. Adding all of these extra pointy objects
to a weapon makes it heavier and easier to catch with a parrying blade but also makes
it a little more difficult for the wielder to avoid getting stuck! The modification adds
+2 to the damage of the weapon but adds +1 to its ENC and DEX requirement. Also,
enemies parrying the spiked weapon will have a +5% bonus to their roll.
Example: A Spiked Glaive will inflict a mighty 1D8+3 damage but will weigh 4 ENC and
require a DEX of 10 to wield it properly. With the +5% bonus enemies receive to parry it,
its wielder may find it hard to land those deadly spiked blows.

The Weapon Modification Process

A weaponsmith making modifications to a weapon must spend the allotted time
doing the work in a proper forge or workshop, and suffers severe penalties for trying
to make modifications outside of such environments (–20 to –50% commonly). Once
the time has been spent doing the work, the weaponsmith makes the adjusted Craft
(Weaponsmith) Skill Test. The outcomes of possible results of that Skill Test are below.
Critical Success: The weapon can ignore any one of the penalties described in the modification
descriptions (Games Master’s choice).

Success: The modification is complete and all the bonuses and penalties described are
applied.
Failure: The modification is harder than first thought. The weapon suffers one Hit Point
of damage (beyond Armour Points) and the modification process must be repeated.
Fumble: The modification was too invasive and the weapon suffered massively in its
failing, losing one Armour Point and one 1D4 Hit Points immediately. If this brings
either of those statistics to zero, the weapon is broken and unsalvageable. No further
attempts to modify the weapon can be made.
No weapon can have more than one modification at a time. This does not mean that a
weapon cannot be modified multiple times; it merely means that the last modification
performed takes precedence over all of the others. One thing to remember when
performing modifications over other modifications: all negative modifiers to Armour
Points and Hit Points are permanent and cumulative, whilst new modification bonuses
replace old ones.

76

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Ranged Combat Weapons
As with Close Combat weapons, ranged weapons are defined by a common series of
characteristics.
Damage Dice: The damage the weapon deals on a successful attack.
Range: This is the effective range of the weapon. The maximum range a weapon can
be fired or thrown is twice this score.
Load: This shows how many Combat Actions are required to load or reload the
weapon.
STR/DEX: The minimum STR and DEX scores needed to easily wield this weapon.
For every point a Characteristic is below these minimums, a –5% penalty is applied to
an Adventurer’s skill when attacking with this weapon.
Size: Each ranged weapon possesses a size rating. In the case of projectile weapons, this
does not relate to the firing weapon itself, but rather to how ‘forceful’ its ammunition
is. The value is used to determine whether the weapon can overcome any shield which
may parry it. The size categories are Small (S), Medium (M), Large (L), Huge (H) and
Enormous (E).
Combat Manoeuvres: Any specific Combat Manoeuvres applicable to the weapon or
its ammunition.
ENC: The weight and bulk of the weapon. See the Legend Core Rulebook for more
details on Encumbrance and its effects on Adventurers.
AP/HP: The armour points and Hit Points possessed by the weapon. When Hit Points
reach 0, the weapon is broken and useless.
Cost: The average cost in Silver Pieces to purchase this weapon.

Ranged Weapon Descriptions

Arbalest: This is a metal-armed crossbow that when stood on its end is as tall as a man.
It fires specially crafted arbalest bolts that have been reinforced in order to withstand
the sheer force that its braided cord propels them at. Able to drive a finger-thick bolt a
full hand’s depth into an oak tree, the arbalest hits with force enough to punch through
armour as if it were thin cloth. An Adventurer’s Damage Modifier is never applied
when he is using an arbalest.
Atlatl: A simple rope-based mechanical device used to further the range and hitting power
of javelins, the atlatl takes time to load but its effects can be quite spectacular. Only javelins
may used with an atlatl. There is a very simple version of the device made from a wooden
shaft that has a cupped end in which to fling a javelin, but it is far inferior to the rope-based
versions (and only adds +1 damage).
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

77

Blowgun: This is a hollow tube or pipe, usually made of wood or bone, which expels a
dart when its user blows on one end. As the dart itself is capable of little damage, blowguns
are seldom used without some kind of poison. An Adventurer’s Damage Modifier is never
applied when he is using a blowgun, which is best used for precision attacks.
Bola: With two heavy weights at the opposite ends of a braid of leather cord or even
light chain, the bola is a weapon primarily designed to entangle and bring down a
target rather than kill it.
Boomerang: This specially carved piece of wood with a slight bend in its middle is
designed spin along the ground towards its target when thrown, it will not return to the
thrower whether it hits or misses. With a simple flick of the wrist the boomerang spins
toward its target, connecting with surprising force. The boomerang is also designed to
be used as a club.
Chakram: See entry in Close Combat Weapons on page 61.
Dart: A dart resembles an arrow with a longer head and shorter shaft (usually slightly
less than half a metre in length). Darts are rarely a warrior’s weapon and are found in
the hands of small game huntsmen and roguish Adventurers.
Dart Blade: See entry in Close Combat Weapons on page 62.
Discus: A discus is a flat disc made of clay or wood rimmed with a hard metal ring.
Hurling the discus is an old sport and show of physical prowess. However, someone
who is good enough with a discus could easily split skin and shatter bone with a
forceful throw. Aerodynamic as it is, a discus used to attack a target outside of its
effective range only suffers a –25% penalty (or halves the skill if under 50%).
Flatbow: A flatbow is a bow made from a single plank of supple wood, likely ash or
maple, and lashed with a rather stout bowstring. Similar in size to a shortbow, the
flatbow requires less STR to fire but also cannot launch an arrow nearly as far as its
larger, curved cousins.
Heavy Crossbow: Similar in concept to the light crossbow, this version is larger and
reinforced with metal bands to handle the immense pull of the string. Many heavy
crossbows come with a metal stirrup so the firer can use his foot for leverage or a crank
to pull back the thick string. An Adventurer’s Damage Modifier is never applied when
he is using a heavy crossbow.
Horse Bow: This is a bow designed specifically for the archer who rarely leaves his saddle.
Longer on the top half than the lower, its gentle curve allows for remarkably direct shots
even when being bounced around on the back of a steed. Despite its strange design, a horse
bow can be fired without penalty from on foot as well as mounted.
Hurling Sphere: One of the simplest ranged weapons, a hurling sphere is a hollowed
ball of metal or stone filled with sand or lead. The thrower should clasp the sphere in

78

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

both hands and hurl it overhead like a catapult, bringing its weight down on the target
with crushing force.
Javelin: The javelin is a light spear-like weapon with a smooth-bored head designed for
throwing short distances.
Kunai: See entry in Close Combat Weapons on page 65.
Light Crossbow: A simple mechanical bow, the light crossbow often sees service in
small armies that lack training in other types of ranged weapons. It can be clutched
in one hand and reloaded with the other, making it a good infantryman’s weapon. An
Adventurer’s Damage Modifier is never applied when he is using a light crossbow.
Long Bow: A long bow has a shaft as much as two metres in length, and is designed
to be fired on foot. A long bow cannot be used from horseback and is one of the most
feared ranged weapons of the battlefield.
Moon Bow: An odd-looking bow with a curve so dramatic that it nearly looks like a
crescent moon, the moon bow’s arms almost come together and touch when firing.
Although the bow requires a surprising amount of control to prevent the ‘closed circle’
from bothering the firer’s aim or balance, it can project an arrow with surprising force
at a modest range.
Net: See entry in Close Combat Weapons on page 67.
Nomad Bow: A nomad bow is shorter than the long bow and sacrifices some range and
power in exchange for portability. It is very popular amongst Adventurers who live on
the road and often without mount, as the nomad bow can be worn over the shoulder
comfortably.
Petals: What look like small sharpened coins or ovals made of metal, petals are easily
concealable throwing weapons. Petals that are stored in a coin purse or tucked into a
false pocket are almost impossible to detect. In fact, some coin-laden Adventurers might
throw a handful of petals in their coffers or coin pouches just to deter pickpockets or
thieves who are in for a painful surprise, should they grab a fistful of coins with a petal
or two tucked in!
Recurve Bow: A recurve bow has forward-angled arms that are strung almost a hand’s
span in front of the bracing grip; the arms come down together when pulled back.
Recurve bows are known to be able to punch right through plate armour but can be
outranged by nomad bows quite easily.
Short Bow: Designed to be fired from horseback, the short bow is equally useful as
a footsoldier’s weapon. It is a good hunting tool as well as a weapon of war and when
used to hunt deer and smaller game animals it can make all the difference.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

79

Sling: A sling is a long strip of cloth or leather used to fling a stone or bullet at a target.
It was originally a bird-hunter’s tool of choice. Many slings also have a sewn-in leather
cup or pad in which to hold the projectile while gathering velocity. A sling’s silence and
relative accuracy in the hands of a skilled user also makes it a useful tool for rogues and
other shady characters.
Spike: Another basic throwing weapon, the throwing spike is a thin, rod-like piece of
metal or wood, about as long as a man’s hand, sharpened at one end. With a flick of the
wrist and elbow the user can send one of these spikes flying toward a target. Throwing
spikes are a favourite of assassins and bandits for their ability to be concealed in plain
sight. Tucked or otherwise put away, onlookers have a –50% to their Perception skill in
order to locate any set of three or fewer spikes hidden in one place.
Staff Sling: A simple sling mounted on the end of a wooden haft, the staff sling can be
spun in wide circles, which generates greater force for throwing. When not being used
as a sling, the leather cup and cord can be wound around the haft and lashed down,
effectively turning the staff sling into a quarterstaff.
Throwing Star: Also traditionally called ‘shuriken’, these are light pieces of metal with
three or more razor sharp points. Throwing stars are a favourite of certain types of
assassins for delivering deadly poisons, but to do so the thrower must take a –10%
Throwing penalty or risk poisoning himself on the deadly edges.
Trident: See entry in Close Combat Weapons on page 69.
Whip Bow: Named for its resemblance to a coachman’s whip, the whip bow is a very
flexible piece of wood with a shortened bowstring tied to only one of its ends. The string
has a small loop at the end, which is placed on specially notched arrows before pulling
backwards. The flexible shaft bends almost in half before the user should let go of the
arrow, which hurls forward similar to a catapult.
Wrist Bow: A delicate and compact version of the light crossbow, the aptly named
wrist crossbow has very short arms and can be worn under a billowing or loose sleeve.
It is commonly worn on the ‘good hand’ of the firer, meaning that his off-hand must be
used to quickly reload the weapon. Although the wrist bow is small it can still restrict
movement, and using any sort of melee weapon in the hand with the wrist crossbow
lashed to it causes a –10% penalty to both attack and Parry Skill Tests.

Ranged Weapon Ammunition

The table on page 83 lists specific types of ammunition, how sturdy they might be,
whether they weigh enough to have an ENC score and their cost. Please note that
unless an entry has a number after its name, the price listed is for a single item.

80

Arbalest bolts: Made of metal-shod hardwood roughly as thick as a man’s thumb,
arbalest bolts are tipped with heavy metal heads that resemble a stiletto or dagger. They
use small fletching from waxy-feathered fowl and are remarkably accurate, if only due
to the sheer force with which they are fired.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Weapon
Arbalest
Atlatl
Blowgun
Bolas
Boomerang
Chakram
Dagger
Dart
Dart blade
Discus
Flatbow
Hatchet
Heavy crossbow
Horse bow
Hurling sphere
Javelin
Kunai
Light crossbow
Long bow
Moon bow
Net
Nomad bow
Petals
Recurve bow

Ranged Weapons

81

Damage
1D12
+2
—
1D4
1D3+2
1D6
1D4
1D4
1D2
1D4+1
1D8
1D6
1D10
1D8+1
2D3
1D8
1D3+1
1D8
1D8
1D10
—
1D6+1
1D3
1D8

Damage
Modifier
N
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y

Range
180m
+10m
15m
15m
50m
30m
10m
20m
15m
50m
40m
10m
150m
100m
10m
30m
15m
100m
175m
100m
2.5m
120m
10m
175m

Load
4
2
1
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
1
—
3
1
—
—
—
2
1
1
—
1
—
1

STR/DEX
10/9
5/11
–/9
–/9
5/11
–/13
–/9
–/9
–/–
–/9
8/9
7/11
7/9
10/12
13/–
5/9
–/7
5/9
13/11
11/12
10/11
11/11
–/12
13/11

Size
E
L
—
—
—
S
S
S
S
L
L
S
H
M
S
H
M
L
H
H
—
L
–
H

Combat Manoeuvres
Impale, Sunder
Impale
Impale
Entangle
Stun Location
—
Impale
Impale
Impale
Stun Location
Impale
Bleed
Impale, Sunder
Impale
—
Impale, Pin Weapon (Shield)
Impale
Impale
Impale
Impale
Entangle
Impale
Impale
Impale

ENC
3
1
—
—
—
1
—
—
—
—
1
1
2
1
1
1
—
1
1
1
3
1
—
1

AP/HP
6/10
2/4
1/4
2/2
2/4
4/7
4/6
2/1
2/4
2/3
3/4
4/6
4/8
4/6
4/6
3/8
4/4
4/5
4/7
2/6
2/20
4/5
2/2
4/8

Cost
500 SP
20 SP
30 SP
10 SP
25 SP
85 SP
30 SP
10 SP
15 SP
30 SP
65 SP
25 SP
350 SP
185 SP
30 SP
20 SP
25 SP
150 SP
200 SP
175 SP
200 SP
150 SP
20 SP
225 SP

75 SP
20 SP
5 SP
15 SP
20 SP
15 SP
155 SP
50 SP
175 SP
1
2
—
—
2
—
2
1
—
L
M
L
M
H
S
L
L
M
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Short bow
Shortspear
Sling
Spike
Staff sling
Throwing star
Trident
Whip bow
Wrist Crossbow

1D6
1D8+1
1D8
1D4
2D6
1D4
1D8
1D6+2
1D4+1

80m
25m
200m
10m
100m
15m
10m
30m
50m

1
—
1
—
3
—
—
1
1

9/11
5/9
–/11
–/9
–/11
–/13
10/7
5/9
5/11

Impale
Impale
Stun Location
Impale
Stun Location
Bleed
Impale
Impale
Impale

4/4
4/5
1/2
4/2
3/6
4/1
4/10
4/4
3/4

Cost
AP/HP
ENC
Combat Manoeuvres
Size
STR/DEX
Load
Range
Damage
Modifier
Damage
Weapon

82

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Arrows: Arrows are the most commonly used
ammunition in Legend. While not as simple to
make as sling bullets, they are far more popular
for their multiple utilities.
Arrow, Fishing: More of a tool than a weapon,
the fishing arrow is a thin-headed arrow that
has a set of three small barbs facing backwards
to catch and hold a wriggling fish. It also has
almost no fletching at all (it interferes with
underwater propulsion) but rather a small
metal ring onto which cord or twine can be
tied to retrieve a shot fish. Using fishing arrows
to catch fish grants a +10% bonus to Survival
Skill Tests.
Arrow, Lotus-blossom: A true work of artistry
by the same crafters who patiently make folded
metal blades, the lotus-blossom arrow is a
cluster of small, thin folded metal chips rooted
to one point at the tip of an arrow. While not
as stable in flight as regular arrows due to the
wind-drag upon the clustered-head (imposing
a –10% penalty to hit), this vaguely flowershaped group of blades shred flesh to ribbons
upon impact, giving a +2 bonus to damage.
Arrow, Moon-blade: One of the more awkwardlooking arrowheads, moon-blade arrows have
crescent-shaped blades that are slightly bevelled
on each side to make the arrows spin rapidly
in flight. This does very little to the range of
the arrow or its damage potential but does
give it a broader surface in which it cuts. This
makes it far easier for the arrow to cut through
cloth, rope, leather and other flexible materials.
Moon-blade arrows ignore half the Armour
Point rating of any flexible material they hit, at
the Games Master’s discretion.
Arrow, Signal: Not made for combat at all,
signal arrows have a hollow head bored out in
the same fashion as a shrilling whistle. When
fired (preferably upward into the air) the arrow
corkscrews and emits a distinct and piercing wail
that can be heard on a clear day for up to five
kilometres. If actually fired at a target, the arrow

has a –35% penalty to hit and will Ranged Weapon Ammunition
cause half damage if the attack is Ammunition
AP/HP ENC Cost
successful.
Arbalest Bolts (10)
1/2
1
5 SP
Arrows (10)

1/1

—

1 SP

Arrow, Wood-headed: Carved Arrow, Fishing
1/2
—
2 CP
fully from oak, mahogany, teak Arrow, Lotus-blossom
1/2
—
2 SP
or even ebony, ‘wood-headed’ is Arrow, Moon-blade
1/2
—
6 CP
actually a misnomer as the entire Arrow, Signal
1/1
—
3 CP
arrow is carved carefully from the Arrow, Wood-headed
1/1
—
2 CP
same piece of wood. While this Blowgun Darts (10)
1/1
—
2 SP
does absolutely nothing for the
Blowgun Darts, Barbed (5)
1/1
—
2 SP
integrity or stability of the arrow
Blowgun Marking Wads (20)
0/1
—
1 SP
itself, it does mean that the arrow
Crossbow Bolts (10)
1/1
—
2 SP
no longer bears any metal at all.
Crossbow Bolt, Barbed
1/1
—
6 CP
This is only a consideration for
Crossbow Bolt, Metal-core
2/2
—
1 SP
those who may have some kind
Crossbow Bolt, Wood-headed 1/1
—
3 CP
of religious belief against the use
Heavy
Crossbow
Bolt,
Bola
2/10
1
5 SP
of metal or forged weaponry or
Sling
Bullets
(10)
1/1
—
5 CP
those who must use things ‘of
Whip
Bow
Arrows
(10)
1/1
—
2 SP
the land’. Also, in some Legend
worlds there are creatures that can
only be harmed or perhaps harmed especially, by wooden objects. All Armour Points
are considered one point higher than normal against wood-headed arrows (though a
creature with 0 AP does not gain this bonus).
Blowgun Darts: Blowgun darts are small, thin needles or stubby miniature arrowheads
that often have a tuft of down or cotton at the end in order to catch the rush of air in
a blowgun. They are not designed to do much in the way of damage, but can deliver
a single dose of poison to a target quite easily – if the firer can manage to bypass his
armour, of course.
Blowgun Darts, Barbed: Although no more damaging than regular darts, barbed
darts stick in any wound that they roll their maximum amount of damage for. These
darts, while imbedded, penalise all Skill Tests by –5% per dart, and inflict an additional
point of damage when a Combat Action is taken to remove them (without the proper
First Aid test).
Blowgun Marking Wads: Used by trackers, marking wads are small pellets of sawdust
or wool that have been soaked in dye or heavily scented oil and allowed to dry enough
to be fired. They do not fly very well, halving the effective range of the blowgun, and
inflict no damage when they hit. However, anyone struck will bear a small (maybe
three or four centimetres in diameter) splatter of the marking substance. The dye
can be easily seen if an Adventurer knows what to look for and musk oils or scented
marking fluids can be traced via smell extremely easily (especially if tracking animals
are involved). The dye adds +10% to Perception tests against the marked target and the
scented oil adds +25% to Tracking rolls to find the target by scent. The fluids from a
marking wad remain on the target for 1D3 days or until thoroughly washed with lye.
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

83

Crossbow Bolts: Simple and stout, bolts are miniature arrows with smaller fletching
designed to carry the bolt on existing force rather than keep it aloft. They tend to have
thinner, more compact heads of metal on them to drive deeper with the impact but
some have the wider hunting heads commonly seen on arrows. Bolts tend to be thicker
than arrows and are purchased to fit a specific type of crossbow – wrist, light, medium
or heavy.
Crossbow Bolt, Barbed: See the entry on barbed arrows for details on this item, as the
two function exactly the same.
Crossbow Bolt, Metal-core: Heavier and shorter-ranged than a common crossbow
bolt, metal-core bolts have a thin rod of metal drilled through their centres – giving
them far more impact force when they strike a resilient target. Metal-core bolts reduce
the crossbow’s effective range by one-third (round fractions up) but ignore the first
three points of AP a target has from non-magical armour.
Crossbow Bolt, Wood-headed: See the entry on wood-headed arrow for details on
this item, as the two function exactly the same.
Heavy Crossbow Bolt, Bola: A specially crafted bolt that is fitted to the end of a
heavy crossbow, the bola bolt has actually two iron balls for heads. When fired, the
lightweight shaft falls away as the heavy balls catch the rush of air and begin to separate
and spin. This shot reduces the effective range of a heavy crossbow to 75 metres and
does not use the damage statistics of the crossbow at all. Instead, this shot operates in
the same manner as a thrown bola and has the additional range of the crossbow. Due
to the weapon’s construction and the specific mechanics used in order to fire, loading a
bola bolt takes an additional two Combat Actions.
Sling Bullets: Stone or lead ovals that can reach surprising speeds and accuracy when
hurled by a skilled user. Bullets can be retrieved rather easily and most can even be
hammered or rolled back into a usable shape with little effort (as lead becomes soft
when heated slightly).
Whip Bow Arrows: These are a cross between crossbow bolts and true arrows. They
are shorter and broader so as to be held between the fingers when pulling back a whip
bow. They also have a short metal hook below their heads to hold the whip bow’s string
loop. They are generally viewed as more of a bolt than an arrow, and some fletchers
might call them by an alternate name: ‘whip darts’.

Alternate Weapon Materials

84

The following table shows a variety of alternate materials that have different effects
upon weaponry. The table shows the material, the modifier to Craft Skill Tests when
trying to make the weapon and the suggested cost modifier involved. Further details are
included in the materials descriptions. It should be noted that some of these materials
may not be available in all cultures, game settings or campaigns but this is ultimately
up to the Games Master.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Alternate Weapon Materials
Alternate
Material
Bone
Coral
Gold
Steel
Stone

Craft skill
Modifier
+10%
–15%
–10%
–10%
+15%

Wondrous
Material

–75%

Cost Modifier
–50%
x2
x12
x4
–75% (and have
materials on hand1)
x20 (and have
materials on hand1)

It is up to the Games Master to decide
how much of a substance is enough to
craft the weapon in question.
1

Bone: Lengths of bone have been carved
into sharp weapons in various cultures
for centuries and some still believe these
weapons are just as effective in present
times. Chipped, sanded and ground into
the shape of the weapon in question,
bone is best suited as a bladed or piercing
weapon – but a good stout bone club or
maul can do almost as much damage as
a wooden one!
Weapons made from bone inflict –1
damage from their porous edges or heft,
and reduce their AP by 1.

Coral: Weaponsmiths that manage to
shape or chip coral into a good piercing or slashing weapon will find the new material
tears, as opposed to slices, the flesh of the enemy. Wounds left by coral weapons become
easily infected and are terribly difficult to heal by normal means. Coral is rather heavy,
much like stone, and becomes even more so when wet.
Coral weaponry with a blade or piercing spike inflict +1 damage, and any First Aid
attempts upon inflicted wounds are penalised by –10%. The extra weight reflects a
+1 ENC, which is raised to +3 ENC whenever significantly wet (due to heavy rain,
submersion and so on).
Gold: Soft as far as metals go, gold is not the first material chosen to craft weaponry.
However, its very existence symbolises wealth and nobility. It is very costly to make any
sort of weapon out of gold, with most weaponsmiths seeing the use of gold in such a
way as an utter waste of good resources that could be spent elsewhere.
Gold weaponry suffers –1 to damage and Armour Points, and a –3 to Hit Points (to a
minimum of one). Its ENC score is also doubled, and +1 is added to the STR necessary
to wield it due to the denseness of the precious metal. As a sign of wealth, anyone
wielding a golden weapon can add +10% to his Influence skill.
Steel: The alloy of iron ore and carbon, steel is light and hard – making it the perfect
metal for weaponry. It holds an edge when sharpened for a very long time, resists
denting and nicking from common use and is able to cut through most common
armour with relative ease. Essentially, a culture that can make steel weaponry will have
a definite advantage over all those who cannot.
Steel weaponry adds +2 to its Armour Points and +4 to its Hit Points while reducing its
ENC by 1. Superior to bronze and common irons in nearly every way, steel weaponry
is only available to cultures that have managed to discover the process to actually mix
and create the metal.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

85

Stone: Heavy and unable to hold a decent edge for more than a few strikes, stone
weaponry can vary from a piece of granite lashed to a branch to a fine sliver of chipped
obsidian in the shape of a stiletto. Although simple and rather primitive; stone can be
quite effective as a weapon if the wielder is strong enough to use it.
Stone weapons add +1 to their Armour Points and +3 Hit Points, +2 to the STR required
to wield them and doubles their ENC score.
Wondrous Material: In the many lands of Legend, there are mythic materials as durable
as a dragon’s scale, light as a feather and as sharp as the edge of a razor. These are all
collectively classified as ‘wondrous material’.
Exactly what weaponry might be made from wondrous material is entirely up to the
Games Master. It should be legendary, with blades able to cut through any mortal
substance and maces that cause the ground to shake. Should a Games Master decide to
add wondrous material to his campaign, it is up to him to decide its capabilities.

Black Powder Weapons
Often discovered by accident when an alchemist combines sulphur, charcoal and
saltpetre, black powder is a leap in technology that changes worlds. Extremely volatile
and flammable, the substance is a grainy grey-black concoction that burns rapidly when
set to spark or flame or explodes violently when packed tightly and lit somehow.
The following weapons and devices can be invented, crafted and used by Adventurers
with access to the black powder. With the exception of the thrown weaponry, all of the
following weapons require a special Ranged Combat Weapon Skill – Black Powder –
in order to operate successfully. Also, any weapon with a Load time listed additionally
requires an unmodified Craft (Gunsmithing) or Mechanisms Skill Test with the listed
bonus/penalty.
Arquebus: A smaller version of the musket with a shorter stock and an easier barrel to swab
and re-pack, the arquebus is a powerful, two-handed rifle that can rip into armoured targets
with ease. It is best used as a one-shot weapon due to its lengthy reload time, and many who
use it attach a dagger or shortsword to its end to serve as a bayonet for when the enemy closes
– should he survive the shot from the weapon.
Blunderbuss: This is one of the simplest forms of a black powder firearm, where a
packing cup of powder is burned in order to propel small pebbles, shot and other
scrap from the weapon’s wide-barrel. The resulting explosion hurls the loose shot into
a cloud of deadly projectiles. While these projectiles may not have much in the way of
penetration, they are very difficult to avoid and spread their damage out over multiple
sections of a target. Anyone targeted by a blunderbuss not only has a –10% to their
Evade skill against the attack, but the damage rolled will be divided evenly (round
fractions up) amongst 1D4+1 Hit Locations .

86

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Bomb, Hand: A simple clay shell or metal sphere packed with black powder and
fragments of shrapnel, a fuse, and capped in wax, the hand bomb is a deadly and
dangerous device. After lighting the fuse the hand bomb then has 1D3 turns (rolled
secretly by the Games Master) before it will explode on the same Strike Rank as it was
lit, inflicting its damage to all targets within five metres. This damage is divided evenly
between all body locations of a target (or body locations within the area of effect in
the case of larger targets), deducting the AP from damage to each location. Should the
user Fumble his Throwing Skill Test, he drops the bomb at his feet where it explodes
normally after the fuse burns its allotted time.
Bomb, Projectile: A larger version of the hand bomb, a projectile bomb is too heavy
to be thrown (without a STR of 25 or more) and must be launched from a catapult,
trebuchet or other propulsion device. It has all the same rules as a hand bomb, save
for the fact that its fuse is designed to burn very slowly – but will ignite the bomb
automatically upon impact with anything harder than soft soil. Otherwise, the fuse
will detonate the bomb in 2D6 turns after it is lit. Otherwise, treat a projectile bomb
exactly the same as a hand bomb (see above).
Decksweeper: A short-barrelled rifle with nearly no stock, the decksweeper is named
for its frequent use on ships and boats. Packed like a blunderbuss, but loaded with a
series of three slugs instead of shot, a decksweeper does not have the range of a rifle or
the cloud-effect of a blunderbuss. Instead it has the ability to strike a target up to three
times with deadly ricocheting slugs. When a target is ‘hit’ by a decksweeper, the firer
must roll a 1D6–3. The resulting number is the number of slugs that hit the target
(roll separate Hit Locations for each). Due to the construction of the powder cup on a
decksweeper, it can be used without fear of getting wet in normal seagoing conditions
but direct rain or splashed water will soak the powder and ruin the shot.
Firework: This is an attempt at making a self-propelled bomb. By attaching a tube
of black powder to a thin stick and capping it with a relatively aerodynamic head, the
firework is loaded with varying degrees of packed powder to create propulsion – and
then explosion. The actual attack roll is a simple percentile roll – with the number
rolled being the opposing number for the targets’ Athletics rolls to get out of the way
of the impending explosion. Should this attack hit any targets, treat the explosion in
the same manner as a hand bomb.
Musket: A barrel-loaded gun that requires the slug and powder to be tamped down
with a rod or ‘ram’ the musket requires that a flame or fuse be dropped into a small
cup or notch at the rear of the weapon in order to fire. Adequately accurate to a decent
range, muskets are best known for ranked firing lines that erupt in lead shot and clouds
of white smoke. It is often considered to be the standard to which all other firearms
are compared.
One-shot Pipe: A very simple weapon that was the predecessor of the pistol, a oneshot pipe is a half-metre length of metal with a leather or cloth wrapping around its
midsection. The pipe is packed with powder at one end and a small ball slug is set into the
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

87

opposite one. When a lit fuse or flaming wick is set to the powder the resulting explosion
sends the ball flying. There is a small degree of danger with the open-powder of the oneshot pipe, as anyone firing one has a 50% chance of suffering 1 point of fire-damage to
his lighting hand from the burning powder erupting backwards. Due to their lengthy
reload time and danger, one-shot pipes are not a weapon of choice.
Pistol, breach-loading: This is a category of firearms that comprises any single-shot
pistol that is loaded from the rear of the weapon, normally where the pistol ‘breaks’ in
half. A lit fuse tucked into the hammer of the pistol is pushed forward by the simple
lever action of the trigger, igniting the powder bagged into the firing chamber. Pistols
have abysmal ranges, even compared to other black powder weaponry but pack a decent
punch and are sometimes best used up close. Breach-loading pistol attacks used in close
combat cannot be Evaded.
Pistol, duelling: In an attempt to add range and accuracy to the common flintlock pistol, the
duelling pistol is a long-barrelled version of the weapon. Not only does the longer barrel add
a bit of range but it also gives the slug a fraction of additional force! The longer barrel does,
however, make it easy for an opponent to parry it away in close combat, eliminating its ability
to ever be used in close combat practically.
Pistol, flintlock: The simplest form of true pistol, the flintlock pistol is essentially a barrelloaded firearm with a powder notch and a mechanical flint-striker attached to the trigger.
Once loaded, a simple pull of the trigger drops the chunk of flint across a small grater or
chip of steel to send sparks down into the powder. This style of firearm has a slightly longer
reloading time but the additional force gained by the contained powder is noticeable. Like
the others of its ilk, a flintlock pistol attack used in close combat cannot be Evaded.
Pistol, revolver: A flintlock pistol with four separate barrels that are each carefully poured,
the revolver allows the user to fire four separate shots without reloading but at the cost
of a longer reload time outside of combat and the possibility of detonating multiple
barrels at once. Reloading a revolver takes a full ten minutes of cleaning, packing and
re-assembly; a feat that cannot be undertaken in combat. Every time a revolver is fired
there is a chance that multiple barrels will go off at once due to bouncing flint sparks or
stray powder grains, which could result in a dazzling and deadly show of smoke and fire.
In game terms, each time a revolver fires there is a chance for additional firings equal to
5%. Should this happen, the attack must be rolled multiple times at the same target, but
the gun will require double normal reload time due to excess soot and shrapnel inside the
powder notches. Like attacks from the rest of the short-barrelled pistols, revolver attacks
used in close combat cannot be Evaded.
Rifle, breach-loading: This weapon is, quite simply, a much larger version of its pistol
equivalent with a stock and higher calibre barrel. Equally packed with more powder
and a bigger slug, the breach-loading rifle has a better range than a musket, but lacks
some of its damage potential. A breach-loading rifle could be used as a club in close
combat, but with a –10% penalty to hit.

88

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

AP/HP
4/7
4/8
4/3
4/4
4/5
1/2
4/8
4/3
4/4
4/3
4/4
4/4
4/6
4/7
4/7
ENC
2
3
1
1
2
—
3
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
3
STR/DEX
10/9
10/9
11/9
–/10
9/9
–/10
11/9
–/10
9/10
9/9
9/7
10/9
10/9
10/7
11/9
Load
5/–10%
8/–5%
—
—
5/–20%
—
6/–10%
10/–20%
3/–15%
3/–10%
4/–5%
Special
3/–15%
4/–10%
Special
Range
20m
4m
5m
Varies
5m
50m
30m
5m
6m
10m
5m
6m
40m
35m
40m
Damage
2D8
4D6
6D6
8D8
2D4
4D6+2
2D8+1
1D6
2D4
2D4+1
1D6+2
1D6+1
2D6
2D6
2D4+1
Skill
Black Powder
Black Powder
Throwing
See Description
Black Powder
See Description
Black Powder
Black Powder
Black Powder
Black Powder
Black Powder
Black Powder
Black Powder
Black Powder
Black Powder
Weapon
Arquebus
Blunderbuss
Bomb, Hand2
Bomb, Projectile2
Decksweeper
Firework2
Musket
One-shot Pipe
Pistol, Breach-loading3
Pistol, Duelling
Pistol, Flintlock 3
Pistol, Revolver
Rifle, Breach-loading
Rifle, Flintlock
Rifle, Multi-shot

Black Powder Weapons

Rifle, multi-shot: Called
a number of different
names, this category of
firearm contains any of the
‘ingenious’ attempts to make
revolver versions of a rifle.
They are heavy and often
very unwieldy, imposing a
–5% cumulative penalty to
hit for every full two barrels
the weapon has. All of the
standard rules (including
those regarding multibarrelled explosions) for a
revolver pistol apply, except
that it takes a full half-hour
to clean and reload a multishot rifle. There is rumour
that a seven-barrelled ‘volley
gun’ exists that is designed to
fire all at once on purpose
but such a weapon would
have a ridiculous recoil and
would most likely cause more
damage to the firer than the
target!

Cost1
3,750 SP
3,500 SP
700 SP
850 SP
3,000 SP
550 SP
4,000 SP
1,000 SP
3,500 SP
4,000 SP
3,000 SP
6,000 SP
4,500 SP
5,000 SP
2,000 SP per barrel

Rifle, flintlock: The rifle
version of the common
flintlock firearm, this heavy
weapon sometimes comes
with a small shield or cover
for the powder-notch so as
not to shower the firer’s face
with burning powder grains.
Loaded and fired in the
same manner as the flintlock
pistol, the rifle has a very
admirable range and far
more punch than its pistol
counterpart. A flintlock rifle
could be used as a club in
close combat, but with a
–10% penalty to hit.

89

TRANSPORT
The following section introduces a number of vehicles, some of which are designed
specifically for war while others are built to carry a family’s goods long distances. These
are simply devices used to take one or more Adventurers over distances under some
form of locomotion. They are all classified as ‘transport’ even if they actually carry
nothing more than a single person for the purpose of battle – transport is a general term
that covers all ground vehicles.
Also included in this section are extended descriptions and uses for transportation as
found in Legend. The Transportation table on page 95 shows a collection of ground
transport vehicles available in Legend, with new and other varieties likely to appear in
future sourcebooks and scenarios.
Each Vehicle is characterised by the following qualities:
Common Speed: This modifies the total Movement per round of the being(s) Drawing
the vehicle (see below for more details) to a minimum of one metre per round.
Driving Modifier: This is the modification applied to Driving skill of anyone driving
the vehicle.
Maximum Drawing Mounts: This is the maximum number of animals that can be
harnessed to the particular vehicle for the purposes of pulling it along.
AP/HP: The Armour Points and Hit Points of the vehicle as a whole. Once the vehicle
is reduced to zero Hit Points it is destroyed.
Ram Damage: The damage the vehicle inflicts if performing a ram (see page 97).
ENC Limitation: This is the total amount of ENC the vehicle can carry before
reducing the vehicle’s Movement. For every 10 ENC the vehicle carries over its limit,
Movement is reduced by one metre.
Carriage, Armoured: Used to ferry important individuals who might be targeted for
violence, this is a twin-axel, four-wheeled wagon with framed and reinforced walls
that hide a relatively comfortable internal cabin. The carriage supports three to five
passengers inside with room for some small baggage and the driver sits in a recessed
bench on top of the carriage. The walls of the carriage are reinforced on the outside
with hardened leather and riveted metal, and then have fabric stretched over them to
keep the illusion of a ‘common’ carriage. The driver has slightly raised walls on the

90

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

sides of his bench that grant him the additional AP of the vehicle, over and above any
AP he has himself. The doors to the carriage are easily reinforced with crossbars found
inside and impose a –30% penalty to any Brawn Skill Tests to try and force them open.
Carriage, Covered: This is a simple carriage with wooden walls and soft leather curtains
to keep others from looking inside. It likely has two wooden benches inside and a
ceiling-mounted baggage rack in order to carry passenger bags. What cannot fit inside
is often tethered to the roof of the cabin, causing it to creak and groan considerably
when in motion. It is a good way to travel if someone does not want to deal with the
elements.
Carriage, Noble: For those who have coin to spare and live in the lap of luxury, a noble
carriage is not unlike a common covered carriage – save for the expense of creating
and decorating it. The outside is often adorned with enamel paint in beautiful and
extravagant designs, as well as etchings and carvings in the wood itself to make the
carriage look royal. It even includes a padded seat for the driver. Inside, the cabin is
leather and plush with polished and sometimes sculpted walls that make the passengers
feel comfortable and truly pampered. Some noble carriages are even known to have
racks with wine or cheese to be served on longer trips in the fanciful carriage.
Cart, Large: A large cart is built from huge planks of wood and has large, thick wheels.
It is used to transport several passengers or heavy loads of cargo. Rarely covered by
anything but a leather tarp when necessary, carts are best served for short trips while
under close watch by escorting guards. Often drawn by pairs of mules or pack horses, a
large cart can cause significant damage if it barrels into a foe – but no cart is well-made
for ramming or combat.
Cart, Medium: A very common goods-hauler, a medium cart is easily pulled by a
single mule or horse and can carry a healthy amount of trading wares or adventuring
gear. Any party worth its salt will eventually invest in a good cart to haul around its
constantly fluctuating loot, injured members and other items it might need to take
possession of. Rarely very fancy or attractive, the medium cart is a commonplace sight
across all civilisations.
Cart, Ox: A step up from the medium cart but not quite as hefty as the largest variety,
the ox cart is made from heavy wood and thick metal bindings. It is best hauled by
either a pair of mules or horses, or a single ox. It can carry a decent amount of weight
and maybe a passenger or two. There are some farmers that will fill the cart with goods
for sale, lash in one of their oxen, take it to market and sell literally everything. The
goods, the ox and even the cart – all transformed into coin for the farmer to do it all
again next season with a new ox, cart and supply of goods!
Cart, Small: For the Adventurer or traveller on the go, a small cart rarely has more
than two wheels and can be drawn easily by a single mule or pony. It is not designed to
carry much more than a single person’s worth of goods and does not have a driver’s seat
at all. Instead, the driver is expected to ride a second pony or horse alongside the cart.
Really only useful for those few who want to bring just slightly more than what their
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

91

saddlebags can carry, a small cart is best for carrying goods within the same community
rather than for long travels.
Chariot, Battle: A two-wheeled, open-backed vehicle drawn by two or more steeds
that allows warriors to attack from the raised and spiked walls, the battle chariot is
devoted to causing harm to others. From its blade-spoke wheels to its sharpened reinprow and armoured body, this vehicle can cause significant damage when driven into
units of infantry. Best suited to have a dedicated driver crouched low to the front and
an archer or javelineer behind him, a battle chariot can circle its enemies while picking
off the outermost targets. Some charioteers prefer to have lancers or axemen ready to
take swipes at those who get out of the way of the ramming vehicle – but risk getting
harmed or drawn from the chariot themselves by those they are fighting.
As the walls of the battle chariot cover the legs and abdomen of the driver, these locations
are considered to be covered as per the Cover rules in the Legend Core Rulebook. This
only applies to attacks originating from the front or sides of the chariot; no cover is
gained if attacks are launched from the driver’s rear.
Chariot, Heavy: The heavy chariot is designed to be pulled forward by a team of
massive horses numbering four or more, gathering significant speeds over flat terrain. It
is able to carry a handful of passengers and their equipment, with each of them having
significant room to move. Most often used by plains or desert peoples, heavy chariots
are also used to cross long distances with several possessions in tow.
As the walls of the heavy chariot cover the arms, legs and abdomen of the driver,
these locations are considered to be covered as per the Cover rules in the Legend Core
Rulebook. This only applies to attacks originating from the front or sides of the chariot;
no cover is gained if attacks are launched from the driver’s rear.
Chariot, Light: Small, light and fast is the design idea behind the light chariot. Room
only for the driver, the light chariot was born out of competition and sport racing
rather than combat or travel.
As the walls of the light chariot cover the legs of the driver, these locations are considered
to be covered as per the Cover rules in the Legend Core Rulebook. This only applies to
attacks originating from the front or sides of the chariot; no cover is gained if attacks
are launched from the driver’s rear.
Chariot, War: Basically a battle chariot with an additional rear wall, jutting blades and
spikes from armoured wheels, as well as downward facing blades around the wall edges,
a war chariot is an armoured and deadly weapon. Able to smash through enemies on
foot as if they were weeds underfoot while bringing soldiers or archers to bear from its
protected body, a war chariot can be all a force needs to break their foes.
As the walls of the war chariot cover the legs and abdomen of the driver, these locations
are considered to be covered as per the Cover rules on page136 of the Legend Core

92

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Rulebook. This only applies to attacks originating from the front or sides of the chariot;
no cover is gained if attacks are launched from the driver’s rear.
Howdah, Light: A howdah is basically a giant box that sits on a layer of leather, wool
and fabric on the back of any large animal – from elephants and mammoths to trained
dinosaurs. From within this sometimes covered structure, which is almost always belted
to the beast like some kind of gigantic saddle, a handful of riders can sit on plush
cushions or benches while the creature plods them around. The driver rarely actually
sits within the howdah, needing to have much better access to the sensitive areas of the
creature in order to steer it with goads, reins or sometimes just clicks and calls. Due
to the higher vantage point, riders can only be targeted by ranged attacks. Howdahs
cannot make Ram attacks but by using his Drive skill the rider may make the mount
attack normally.
Howdah, War: Built for battle, a war howdah is essentially the same as a light howdah
– a large box wagon fitted to the top of a large beast – but has armoured and raised
walls with notches for archers and spear-throwers. Some even have extensions to the
front to protect the driver from ranged attacks. War howdahs almost always have
several chains and ropes to reinforce the attachment to the carrying beast, and several
leather belts to keep riders standing where they need to should the beast buck or kick
unexpectedly. Due to the higher vantage point, riders can only be targeted by ranged
attacks. Howdahs cannot make Ram attacks but by using his Drive skill the rider may
make the mount attack normally.
As the walls of the war howdah cover the legs and abdomen of the driver, these locations
are considered to be covered as per the Cover rules on page 136 of the Legend Core
Rulebook.
Night Coach: There are some Adventurers or travellers who feel they must make as
much progress as they can under the cover of darkness and the night coach is the
perfect vehicle for them. Little more than a common carriage painted with pitch tar
and resin, coated to be as dark as a moonless night, many of the moving parts on the
night coach are heavily oiled or greased to keep ambient noise down. The night coach
is generally drawn by black, shoeless steeds or even alternate mounts if quieter ones are
available. Designed to move quickly and stealthily along hard-packed dirt, even the
wheels to the coach have rounded studs for extra traction in soft soil. In game terms,
anyone who rolls a Perception test to locate the night coach in optimum conditions (no
moon, non-stoned road and so on) will suffer a –30% penalty. It is up to the Games
Master to decide whether or not conditions are optimal, and what sort of reduction to
this penalty other circumstances might bring about.
Palanquin: Although the actual structure and look of this vehicle varies greatly, the
design is more or less the same. A palanquin is a flat floor with four or more ‘handles’
to which beings (often slaves or servants) clutch in order to lift the floor off the ground
and walk with it. The floor commonly has some kind of throne or bedding on it,
sometimes with a screened or veiled tent obscuring it from outside view. The palanquin
is a good way of advertising one’s superior position to those beneath it and most who
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

93

witness someone being carried on a palanquin automatically assume he is some kind
of royalty or nobility. In fact, this view is so ingrained that the rider gains a +10% to
his Influence skill while being carried so long as the target(s) of his skill recognise his
superior position.
Rickshaw: Sort of a ‘human-drawn chariot’, the rickshaw is a small wooden cart that
might be able to hold two passengers on a seated bench while the ‘drawing steeds’ (who
are also the drivers) pull the rickshaw forward using a shoulder/arm harness attached
to the front of the vehicle. Hailing from communities that either do not have room
for or are too poor to feed proper steeds for carriages or chariots, the rickshaw is also
a good way for peasantry to make a small wage without having to learn a true craft or
skill. The most simple dullard can pull a rickshaw, and many do, but there are also just
as many intelligent and hard-working rickshaw drivers that make their living taxiing
others around.
Sled, Dog: This simple and traditional vehicle is similar to a common chariot that
has had the wheels replaced with two very long waxen boards or slats. Drawn by large
teams of canines or smaller hoofed animals (deer, antelope and so on), they are simply
dragged over grass, sand and soil. Not good for rocky or uneven terrain, sleds are best
suited for open areas with soft ground. In game terms, a Games Master can decide
that the terrain is not suitable for a sled and either impose a movement penalty, assign
damage to the sled itself as it is ground to pieces or rule it cannot move at all.
Sled, Heavy: A much larger version of the common dog sled, heavy sleds are useful for
crossing much longer distances due to their built-in bench and baggage compartments.
Heavy sleds almost always have some kind of third skid in the front of the sled itself to
handle a bit of the extra weight.
Sled, Ice: A specific type of dog sled, the ice sled replaces its flat slats with tempered
metal ‘blades’ that allow it to skirt across slick ice as if it were any other normal kind
of terrain for the sled. These blades make it very difficult to bring the sled to speed or
manoeuvre when not on snow or ice, using the second set of modifiers for Movement
and Driving Skill Tests listed on the table. As with other sleds, a Games Master can
decide that the terrain is especially bad for an ice sled to be drawn across and either
impose a Movement penalty, assign damage to the sled itself as it is ground to pieces or
rule the vehicle is stuck and cannot move at all.
Sled, War: Designed by belligerent barbarians who likely came from a snowy home,
the war sled is nothing more than a wheel-less battle chariot. Instead of spiked or
bladed wheels, the war sled has metre-long sword blade extensions along the sides.
These blades carve into the legs of those unfortunate enough to be near the war sled
as it passes mercilessly by. As with the other sleds, a Games Master can decide that the
terrain is too rough or uneven for a war sled to move across and can either impose a
Movement penalty, assign damage to the sled’s slats as they are ground to bits or deny
the sled the ability to move at all without flipping.

94

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Vehicle
Carriage, Armoured
Carriage, Covered
Carriage, Noble
Cart, Large
Cart, Medium
Cart, Ox
Cart, Small
Chariot, Battle
Chariot, Heavy
Chariot, Light
Chariot, War
Howdah, Light
Howdah, War
Night Coach
Palanquin
Rickshaw
Sled, Dog
Sled, Heavy
Sled, Ice
Sled, War
Tiger Cage

Transportation

95

Common
Speed
–6m
–2m
–2m
–3m
–2m
–1m
–1m
–2m
–4m
–1m
–3m
–2m
–4m
–2m
–4m
–2m
—
–2m
–/–6m
–4m
–4m

Driving Modifier
–5%
—
—
–5%
—
—
+10%
–5%
—
+5%
–10%
—
–10%
–5%
—
—
—
–5%
–/–15%
–5%
–10%

Maximum Drawing
Mounts
4
4
4
2
2
2
1
4
4
2
8
1
1
4
8
2
14
10
12
8
4
AP/HP
4/60
2/40
2/45
2/50
2/40
2/45
2/30
4/30
3/30
3/25
5/30
2/30
4/40
3/40
2/20
2/18
2/24
3/30
3/24
4/32
4/45

Ram Damage
2D8+drawn DM
1D8+drawn DM
1D8+drawn DM
1D6+drawn DM
1D4+drawn DM
1D4+drawn DM
1D3+drawn DM
1D10+drawn DM
1D8+drawn DM
1D6+drawn DM
2D8+drawn DM
N/A
N/A
1D8+drawn DM
N/A
1D3+drawn DM
1D4+drawn DM
1D6+drawn DM
1D4+drawn DM
1D8+drawn DM
1D8+drawn DM

ENC
Limitation
150
200
180
500
350
400
200
100
125
50
100
200
200
180
75
35
20/80
150
100
100
100

Cost
1,750 SP
550 SP
1,000 SP
100 SP
75 SP
80 SP
50 SP
750 SP
600 SP
500 SP
900 SP
200 SP
500 SP
650 SP
500 SP
125 SP
150 SP
200 SP
225 SP
400 SP
500 SP

Tiger Cage: Also called a ‘slaver’s wagon,’ the tiger cage is little more than a flatbed
cart with metal reinforced walls or bars. Used by carnivals or freak shows to harbour
dangerous animals and creatures, or by travelling slavers who need to keep a lock on their
wares lest they escape, the tiger cage is little more than a prison on wheels. Some might
use bars with spikes or flanges pointing inward to help keep their ‘property’ pacified,
but in the case of dangerous animals these precautions merely risk injuring the beasts. It
would take a –50% Brawn Skill Test in order to bend even one of the thick metal bars,
with the heavy grating door to the cage itself not being any easier to damage.

Driving Transportation Vehicles

In Legend, unless magic is involved, there must be some form of creature or creatures
drawing a vehicle to give it locomotion. There must be at least one Adventurer using
the Drive skill on at least one beast (or slave, or fellow Adventurer and so on) in order
to move round. Just having someone using the Drive skill in charge of the drawing
force is enough to make it mobile in most circumstances.
If a vehicle is simply moving across normal terrain without having any special modifiers
to the environment (unruly horses, bad weather, slippery road and so on) there is no
need to make a Drive Skill Test. Should something adverse happen (landslide, spooked
mounts and so on) the Games Master can call for a Drive Skill Test to keep the vehicle
steady and moving in the right manner. Failure likely means the vehicle has stopped
moving, where a Fumble may have caused some form of catastrophe.
The other main reason a driver would be called to make a Drive Skill Test is during
combat. Combat is fast-paced, chaotic and an easy way of losing control of the vehicle.
At the beginning of each Combat Round in which the vehicle is directly involved, the
driver must make a Drive roll to ensure everything acts normally. If this roll is failed, the
Driver can only act defensively this turn. If the roll is a Fumble, something terrible has
gone wrong and the Games Master should narrate the scene in the case of a crash, injured
steed or other awful circumstances. This roll can be modified in a number of ways:
Drive Skill Modifiers
Circumstance
Vehicle Rammed last turn
Vehicle has 1 to 2 drawing mounts
Vehicle has 3 to 6 drawing mounts
Vehicle has 7 to 10 drawing mounts
Vehicle has 11+ drawing mounts
Vehicle moderately damaged (75% to 51% HP left)
Vehicle seriously damaged (50% to 26% HP left)
Vehicle severely damaged (25% or less HP left)
Driver attempted a Close Combat attack last turn
Driver attempted a Ranged attack last turn
Driver was attacked last turn
Driver suffered damage last turn
Driver failed Driving Skill Test last turn

96

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Modifier
–5%
+10%
—
–5%
–10%
–5%
–10%
–15%
–5%
–10%
–10%
–20%
–10%

If the Drive Skill Test is passed, the Driver may take his Combat Actions as normal,
giving up the first one to drive the vehicle – which will advance its Movement score
each Combat Action (including the first) at the Driver’s direction.

Ram Attacks

If a Driver has a good degree of control over the vehicle and wishes to try to smash it
into the enemy, it takes a Drive Skill Test (with all appropriate modifiers applied from
the list above) to do so. This Drive Skill Test is used in place of a Close Combat Attack
roll and can be opposed only by the target’s Evade skill.
Unlike a normal Close Combat attack, a Ram can attack any number of targets that lie
in its path. The Driver makes one Drive roll for the action and applies it to each target’s
Evade (if possible) individually. Should the Ram connect, the damage is listed for each
vehicle, modified by the average Damage Modifier from the drawing mounts, adding
+1 for each additional drawing mount beyond the first and +1 for every full two metres
the vehicle has moved in a straight line this turn.

Additional Drawing Mounts

The Maximum Drawing Mounts column on the Transportation Table notes the
maximum number of animals that can be harnessed to a vehicle. The Common Speed
column notes a negative modifier that is applied to the total speed of all the mounts
harnessed to vehicle if the number of animals is less than half the Maximum Drawing
Mounts entry. An Armoured Carriage, for example, has a Maximum Drawing Mounts
figure of 4 and a Common Speed of –6m. If the carriage is being drawn by one or two
horses, the entire assembly suffers a –6m penalty per round. However, for every mount
added to the team above half the Maximum Drawing Mount number, the Common
Speed penalty is reduced by 1m. Thus, adding a third horse to the Armoured Carriage
will yield a –5m penalty and a fourth horse will reduce the Common Speed modifier
to –4m.

Water Travel
Transporting goods and people by water is an essential element of most fantasy worlds, as
well as a cusp event in the growth of a civilisation. A ship under sail can carry more cargo
than a 100 horses and it can take that cargo to places horses cannot possibly reach.
The rules given in this section provides the basic information necessary to incorporate
ship travel and ship combat into a Legend campaign. These are rules designed for
efficiency and ease of use, not as an encyclopaedic treatise on the art of sailing, as such
a topic could easily consume 10 books this size.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

97

Ship Designs and Statistics
Each ship detailed in this chapter shares the following characteristics, whether the ship
in question is a mighty warship or a simple canoe.
Length: The distance from bow to stern.
Beam: The widest part of a ship – usually in the middle. Ships equipped with oars will
have the beam of the ship increased when the oars are employed. The inclusion of oars
is considered to increase a ship’s beam to half again its original rating.
Draft: The depth of water needed for the ship to manoeuvre effectively and avoid
running aground. This is the distance between the ship’s keel and the waterline.
Freeboard: The minimum height between the ship’s gunwale and the waterline.
Comparing two ships’ freeboards can help give the vertical distance an Adventurer
needs to achieve when jumping from one to the other.
Capacity: This indicates the cargo capacity of the ship in tons. This number reflects
the ship’s cargo capacity in addition to the weight of the ship’s rigging, crew, provisions
and so forth.
Speed: The speed at which the ship travels per Combat Action / per 12 hour period. A
ship that relies solely upon sails for propulsion is dependent on the wind for its speed,
ships which use sail power for propulsion may also have a penalty or bonus to their
movement rate.
Seaworthiness: The ability of the ship to stand up to the rigours of sailing. All ships
must undergo frequent maintenance in order to keep their Seaworthiness rating from
deteriorating.
Hull: The hull acts as the ship’s armour, just as a suit of chainmail does for a man.
Structure Points: Structure points are a ship’s Hit Points. Damage to these represents
damage to the integrity of the ship itself and ships do not heal of their own accord. A
ship must be hauled into drydock for Structure Points to be repaired.
Weapons: This entry denotes either the number of naval weapons that can be mounted
on the ship or the number and type of cannons normally carried.
Ram: This entry denotes whether or not the ship is capable of mounting a ram. Just
because a ship can mount a ram, does not necessarily mean it will. The statistic given in
parentheses indicates the damage a mounted ram will cause to a rammed ship.
Skill: Every ship has its own peculiarities and each design presents different challenges.
This entry firstly denotes which skill is used when operating the ship (nearly always
either Boating or Shiphandling). Also, though any ship can be operated under ideal

98

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

conditions without the necessity of a Skill Test, when the ship and crew are called upon
for more extreme endeavours , this modifier is applied to the Skill Test. This modifier
is in addition to any others the Games Master feels are appropriate.

Barge

Operating off the same principles as a raft, a barge is a larger and sturdier vessel. It
retains the raft’s wide, flat bottom, which allows it to carry a good amount of cargo
but its low Seaworthiness keeps it in its place as coastal vessel, or, more commonly, a
transport that never leaves harbour.
Hull: 3
Structure Points: 100
Seaworthiness: 10
Length: 12m
Beam: 8m
Draft: 0.5m
Freeboard: 0.3m
Capacity: 12 tons
Crew: 4 rowers or polemen
Speed: 1m / 8.4km
Weapons: One
Skill: Boating +0%
Cost: 500 SP

Barque

A very efficient and large design, the barque was able to outperform most other ship
types with a comparatively small crew. These vessels became the workhorses of the age
of sail, their low running cost and large cargo capacity making them a favourite of
merchants.
Hull: 4
Structure Points: 350
Seaworthiness: 25
Length: 100m
Beam: 13m
Draft: 7.5m
Freeboard: 6m
Capacity: 4,000 tons
Crew: 30
Speed: Sail
Weapons: Fore: None
Aft: None
Broadside: Eight 18-pounders (4D8 each)
Skill: Shiphandling +0%
Cost: 80,000 SP

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

99

Bireme

A leap forward in nautical engineering, the bireme mounts two banks of oars on either
side, presenting a shorter profile in the water and enabling the ship to reach greater
rates of speed than a war galley can manage. These heavy-duty warships are suitable for
engaging in naval warfare or as troop transports and landing vessels.
Hull: 3
Structure Points: 60
Seaworthiness: 12
Length: 20m
Beam: 3m
Draft: 1m
Freeboard: 1m
Capacity: 1 ton
Crew: 60 rowers, 10 officers and sailors, 10 marines or archers
Speed: 5m / 43.2km when rowed
Weapons: Two
Ram: Yes (D3 points of damage for every metre of speed)
Skill: Shiphandling +0%
Cost: 15,000 SP

Brigantine

A small, two masted ship Brigantines are capable vessels, able to operate efficiently
across oceans as well as in coastal regions.
Hull: 4
Structure Points: 250
Seaworthiness: 15
Length: 30m
Beam: 6m
Draft: 2.5m
Freeboard: 4m
Capacity: 100 tons
Crew: 60
Speed: Sail
Weapons: Fore: None
Aft: Four 18-pounders (4D8 each)
Broadside: Ten 18-pounders (4D8 each)
Skill: Shiphandling +0%
Cost: 50,000 SP

100

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Canoe

A canoe is a simple and effective craft, primarily designed for traversing rivers, streams
and lakes. It is capable of ocean travel but a large wave could swamp it easily.
Most canoes are formed of hides sewn about a wooden skeleton. Other cultures build
canoes by hollowing out the interior of a large tree trunk, which results in a sturdier
(and much, much heavier) canoe. The statistics for this ‘dugout’ canoe are placed in
parentheses after the statistics for the hide canoe. A hide canoe weighs approximately
75 kg. A dugout canoe weighs in at 200 kg.
Hull: 1 (2)
Structure Points: 4 (6)
Seaworthiness: 7
Length: 3m
Beam: 0.75m
Draft: 0.3m
Freeboard: 0.3m
Capacity: 0.25 tons
Crew: 1–2 rowers
Speed: 4m / 69.6 km
Weapons: None
Ram: No
Skill: Boating +20%
Cost: 100 SP

Carrack

A larger and more sophisticated vessel than the cog, a carrack is capable of ocean going
voyages and carries enough supplies for very long journeys. Their large cargo capacity
also makes them ideal merchant vessels. Most carracks are the same size as the one
listed here although far larger ones can be built.
Hull: 4
Structure Points: 100
Seaworthiness: 25
Length: 26m
Beam: 8.5m
Draft: 2.5m
Freeboard: 4m
Capacity: 80 tons
Crew: 60 officers and sailors
Speed: Sail –4m/–4km
Weapons: Four
Ram: No
Skill: Shiphandling +0%
Cost: 30,000 SP

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

101

Cog

With the creation of the cog, the merchant ship finally came into its own. Sturdy,
reliable and swift for its size, the cog is capable of transporting vast amounts of cargo
across the widest of oceans. A good cog and a good trade route will make the owner of
the vessel a very rich man.
Hull: 4
Structure Points: 80
Seaworthiness: 28
Length: 24m
Beam: 7m
Draft: 3.5m
Freeboard: 4m
Capacity: 75 tons
Crew: 25 officers and sailors
Speed: Sail –4m/–4km
Weapons: Two
Ram: No
Skill: Shiphandling +10%
Cost: 20,000 SP

Corvette

Small ships which are similar to sloops they are, nonetheless capable warships. These
agile vessels are perfect for attacking larger, poorly armed merchantmen and are
favourites of pirates and privateers.
Hull: 4
Structure Points: 150
Seaworthiness: 18
Length: 18m
Beam: 3m
Draft: 3m
Freeboard: 2m
Capacity: 40 tons
Crew: 50
Speed: Sail +2m / +2km
Weapons: Fore: Two 9-pounders (4D6 each)
Broadside: Eight 9-pounders (4D6 each)
Skill: Shiphandling +0%
Cost: 35,000 SP

102

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Fishing Boat

Small craft of various designed used along many coastal areas these numerous vessels
are normally only used a relatively short distance away from the small coastal villages
where fishermen are found.
Hull: 3
Structure Points: 100
Seaworthiness: 18
Length: 7.5m
Beam: 2.5m
Draft: 1.5m
Freeboard: 0.6m
Capacity: 10 tons
Crew: 3
Speed: Sail
Weapons: None
Ram: No
Skill: Boating +0%
Cost: 600 SP

Fluyt

Small merchant vessels which are cheap to build fluyts are capable of crossing oceans
and are the backbone of many a merchant fleet.
Hull: 4
Structure Points: 200
Seaworthiness: 20
Length: 30m
Beam: 5m
Draft: 2.5m
Freeboard: 4m
Capacity: 150 tons
Crew: 40
Speed: Sail –6m/–6km
Weapons: Fore: None
Aft: Four 18-pounders (4D8 each)
Broadside: Eight 18-pounders (4D8 each)
Skill: Shiphandling –10%
Cost: 20,000 SP

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

103

Frigate

Powerful warships frigates are large sailing vessels distinguished by having all their
guns on their upper deck (unlike ships of the line, which have their guns on multiple
decks).
Hull: 5
Structure Points: 250
Seaworthiness: 20
Length: 40m
Beam: 10m
Draft: 4m
Freeboard: 4m
Capacity: 80 tons
Crew: 120
Speed: Sail +4m/+4km
Weapons: Fore: Two 9-pounders (4D6 each)
Aft: Two 9-pounders (4D6 each)
Broadside: 24 24-pounders (4D10 each)
Skill: Shiphandling +10%
Cost: 300,000 SP

Galleon

Galleons varied in size considerably, with some being far smaller than the vessel shown
here. Powerful warships with potent firepower engaging a galleon is never a task to be
taken lightly.
Hull: 5
Structure Points: 350
Seaworthiness: 20
Length: 50m
Beam: 15m
Draft: 10m
Freeboard: 7m
Capacity: 2,000 tons
Crew: 320
Speed: Sail –6m/–6km
Weapons: Fore: Four 18-pounders (4D8 each)
Aft: Four 18-pounders (4D8 each)
Broadside: 32 18-pounders (4D8 each), 16 24-pounders (4D10 each)
Skill: Shiphandling –10%
Cost: 350,000 SP

104

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Indiaman

Ocean going merchantmen designed to carry both passengers and cargo Indiamen
are capable ships able to defend themselves against pirates.
Hull: 4
Structure Points: 300
Seaworthiness: 15
Length: 50m
Beam: 12m
Draft: 7m
Freeboard: 7m
Capacity: 300 tons
Crew: 250
Speed: Sail –4m/–4km
Weapons: Fore: Four 9-pounders (4D6 each)
Aft: Six 9-pounders (4D6 each)
Broadside: 12 18-pounders (4D8 each)
Skill: Shiphandling –10%
Cost: 70,000 SP

Junk

A twin-masted merchantman capable of long voyages. Far larger junks existed, including
some of the largest wooden ships ever built.
Hull: 3
Structure Points: 75
Seaworthiness: 20
Length: 25m
Beam: 6m
Draft: 0.5m
Freeboard: 2.5m
Capacity: 45 tons
Crew: 6
Speed: Sail
Weapons: None
Ram: No
Skill: Shiphandling +10%
Cost: 18,000 SP

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

105

Longship

One of the most efficient and effective ship designs ever created, the longship is a lean
craft that is equally comfortable under oars or sail. It can mount a ram but is more
often used as a raiding or exploration vessel.
Hull: 3
Structure Points: 70
Seaworthiness: 20
Length: 28m
Beam: 6m
Draft: 1.5m
Freeboard: 1.5m
Capacity: 20 tons
Crew: 50 rowers, up to 200 marines or archers
Speed: 5m / 43.2km when rowed
Weapons: Two
Ram: Yes (D2 points of damage for every metre of speed)
Skill: Shiphandling +20%
Cost: 20,000 SP

Raft

The simplest form of watergoing vessel, a raft is simply a collection of logs lashed
together with rope. It is usually propelled by two men wielding poles but it is possible
to outfit it with a sail. This does not increase the craft’s speed, it simply makes life easier
for those aboard.
Hull: 1
Structure Points: 50
Seaworthiness: 10
Length: 6m
Beam: 2m
Draft: 0.3m
Freeboard: 0.1m
Capacity: 4 tons
Crew: 2 polemen
Speed: 1m / 8.4km
Weapons: None
Ram: No
Skill: Boating –10%
Cost: 50 SP

106

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Rowboat

This small craft is often carried as an auxiliary boat aboard large ships, allowing the
crew to come to shore without the need of a deep draft and docking facilities required
by a ship.
Hull: 2
Structure Points: 15
Seaworthiness: 15
Length: 3m
Beam: 1.5m
Draft: 0.3m
Freeboard: 0.6m
Capacity: 0.5 tons
Crew: 1 rower
Speed: 2m / 16.8km
Weapons: None
Ram: No
Skill: Boating +0%
Cost: 300 SP

Schooner

Small, fast sailing vessels schooners are a favourite of pirates who put their elusiveness
to good use.
Hull: 4
Structure Points: 180
Seaworthiness: 20
Length: 30m
Beam: 7m
Draft: 3.5m
Freeboard: 3m
Capacity: 80 tons
Crew: 50
Speed: Sail
Weapons: Fore: Two 9-pounders (4D6 each)
Aft: Two 9-pounders (4D6 each)
Broadside: Five 18-pounders (4D8 each)
Skill: Shiphandling +10%
Cost: 35,000 SP

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

107

Small Trader

Small and normally unarmed traders which are mainly consigned to short channel
crossings or coastal waters.
Hull: 3
Structure Points: 100
Seaworthiness: 18
Length: 12m
Beam: 4m
Draft: 3m
Freeboard: 2.5m
Capacity: 40 tons
Crew: 10
Speed: +0
Weapons: Fore: None
Aft: None
Broadside: None
Skill: Shiphandling +0%
Cost: 15,000 SP

Snow

Small warships, snows are twin masted vessels which mainly operate on lakes and in
coastal waters.
Hull: 4
Structure Points: 220
Seaworthiness: 18
Length: 30m
Beam: 5m
Draft: 1.5m
Freeboard: 2m
Capacity: 80 tons
Crew: 60
Speed: Sail +2m/2 km
Weapons: Fore: None
Aft: Two 18-pounders (4D8 each)
Broadside: Ten 18-pounders (4D8 each)
Skill: Shiphandling –10%
Cost: 30,000 SP

108

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Trireme

Fast and deadly, the trireme is a mammoth warship. It mounts three banks of oars on
either side and is an exceptional vessel for all types of warfare. Unfortunately, the large
number of oars it mounts requires a large number of rowers.
Hull: 4
Structure Points: 80
Seaworthiness: 18
Length: 37m
Beam: 4.5m
Draft: 2.5m
Freeboard: 3m
Capacity: 1.5 tons
Crew: 170 rowers, 25 officers and sailors, 20 marines
Speed: 6m / 51.6km when rowed
Weapons: Three
Ram: Yes (D4 points of damage for every metre of speed)
Skill: Shiphandling +0%
Cost: 25,000 SP

War Galley

This light and fast ship is designed for coastal manoeuvres, not oceanic travel. It is low
and fast, propelled by a bank of 25 oars on either side. Many war galleys mount rams.
Hull: 3
Structure Points: 40
Seaworthiness: 12
Length: 27m
Beam: 6m
Draft: 0.5m
Freeboard: 1m
Capacity: 2 tons
Crew: 50 rowers, 10 officers and sailors
Speed: 4m / 34.8km when rowed
Weapons: Two
Ram: Yes (D2 points of damage for every metre of speed)
Skill: Shiphandling –10%
Cost: 7,000 SP

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

109

War Junk

A large five masted-vessel capable of dominating most contemporary navies. Their high
cost means only the wealthiest of noblemen can afford their construction and the most
powerful of emperors can call upon a fleet of these ships to do their bidding.
Hull: 4
Structure Points: 15
Seaworthiness: 15
Length: 50m
Beam: 16m
Draft: 6m
Freeboard: 8m
Capacity: 0.5 tons
Crew: 150 sailors, 400 soldiers
Speed: Sail
Weapons: 10
Ram: No
Modifier: Shiphandling +0%
Cost: 150,000 SP

Movement
There are two means of propelling a ship in the days before mechanised engines –
rowing/poling and sails. Many of the ships listed are capable of using both and each
has its own advantages.

Rowing

Each vessel capable of movement by rowing or poling has a Speed entry in its description.
This is the ship’s base Movement in normal operating conditions. Rowing a vessel at
this normal speed counts as medium activity for determining Fatigue.
The vessel can be slowed to half speed, which counts only as light activity for the rowers to
maintain. The speed of the vessel can also be doubled, a gruelling activity which counts as
heavy activity for the rowers.
If the vessel is operating against a fresh gale or heavier wind, the level of activity is
increased by one step. Thus moving at half speed counts as medium activity, moving at
normal speed counts as heavy activity and the vessel cannot move at double speed.
That said, if the vessel is operating before a fresh gale or heavier wind, the level of
activity is decreased by one step. Thus moving at normal speed counts as light activity
and moving at double speed counts as medium activity.
Wind Speed: The speed of the prevailing winds.
Against: The vessel is moving against or perpendicular to the direction of the wind.

110

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Sailing Speed
Before the
Wind
1m / 16.8km
3m / 52.8km

Quarter Wind
—
2m / 33.6km

Moderate
Wind
Stiff Wind

5m / 86.4km

4m / 69.6km

7m / 121km

6m / 103.2km

Fresh Gale

9m / 155.5km

8m / 138.2km

Full Gale
Hurricane

*
*

*
*

Wind Speed
Calm
Light Wind

Half Wind
—
1m /
16.8km
3m /
52.8km
5m /
86.4km
7m /
121km
*
*

Head Wind
—
—

Skill
Modifier
0%
0%

1m / 16.8km 0%
2m / 33.6km –10%
3m / 52.8km –20%
*
*

–40%
–60%

*The winds of a full gale or a hurricane will shred a ship’s rigging. In such a situation,
the best that can be done is to deploy a small amount of sailcloth to keep the ship
steady and hope to ride out the storm. Alternatively, the truly reckless or desperate may
press onward, at the same speed as a fresh gale but with double the normal skill penalty.
Ship Costs
Ship
Barge
Barque
Brigantine
Bireme
Canoe
Carrack
Cog
Corvette
Dhow
Fishing Boat
Frigate
Galleon
Indiaman
Junk
Longship
Raft
Rowboat
Schooner
Small Trader
Snow
Trireme
War Galley
War Junk

Wilds
—
—
—
—
50 SP
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
75 SP
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Rural/Small Town
—
—
—
—
50 SP
—
—
—
—
450 SP
—
—
—
—
—
50 SP
400 SP
—
—
—
—
—
—

Cost by Area
Large Town Small City
550 SP
500 SP
—
80,000 SP
—
50,000 SP
—
15,000 SP
100 SP
100 SP
—
30,000 SP
—
20,000 SP
—
35,000 SP
—
25,000 SP
600 SP
600 SP
—
300,000 SP
—
350,000 SP
—
70,000 SP
—
18,000 SP
—
20,000 SP
50 SP
50 SP
350 SP
300 SP
35,000 SP
—
20,000 SP
30,000 SP
—
25,000 SP
—
7,000 SP
—
150,000 SP

Large City
500 SP
80,000 SP
50,000 SP
15,000 SP
150 SP
30,000 SP
20,000 SP
35,000 SP
25,000 SP
800 SP
300,000 SP
350,000 SP
70,000 SP
18,000 SP
20,000 SP
75 SP
300 SP
35,000 SP
20,000 SP
30,000 SP
25,000 SP
7,000 SP
150,000 SP

111

Before: The vessel is moving with the prevailing winds.
Skill Modifier: The modifier to the Boating or Shiphandling skill imposed by the
winds. This modifier is in addition to the modifiers of the ship itself and any others the
Games Master feels are appropriate.
Rowing and Wind
Wind Speed
Calm
Light Wind
Moderate
Wind
Stiff Wind
Fresh Gale
Full Gale
Hurricane

Against
—
—
Slight Adversity (–25% Speed)

Before
—
—
Slight Adversity (–25% Speed)

Skill
Modifier
—
—
—

Slight Adversity (–25% Speed)
Moderate Adversity (–50% Speed)
Great Adversity (–75% Speed)
*

Slight Adversity (–25% Speed)
Moderate Adversity (–50% Speed)
Great Adversity (–75% Speed)
*

–10%
–20%
–40%
–60%

* Rowing vessels cannot make headway in a hurricane.

Sailing

Sails offer some significant advantages over rowing. A sailing ship requires a much
smaller crew, for example, and the ship relies on wind, rather than broad backs, for its
propulsion.
The speed of a sailing ship depends upon the angle of the wind in relation to the ship,
as well as the speed of the wind itself. For the sake of simplicity, these rules incorporate
four wind directions: before the wind, quarter wind, half wind and head wind.
Before the Wind: The wind is coming directly from the stern of the ship toward the
bow.
Quarter Wind: The wind is blowing against one of the ship’s rear quarters, at a roughly
45 degree angle to the length of the ship.
Half Wind: The wind is blowing across the ship, at a roughly 90 degree angle to the
length of the ship.
Head Wind: The wind is blowing directly from the bow of the ship toward the stern.
The Sailing Speed table gives the speed a sailing ship will travel under different wind
speeds, presented in the following manner: Speed per Combat Action / Speed per 12
hour period. The rules assume all sailing ships travel at roughly the same speed, the
heavier ships using more sails to offset their weight. In the event of one ship chasing
another, the outcome of the race will depend upon the Boating or Shiphandling skills
of the captains of either ship, just as with any other pursuit in Legend.

112

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Ship Qualities: Optional Rule

To add character to a ship, qualities can be used. These are quirks of a ship’s design that
improve or hinder its performance. It is impossible to add or remove a quality from a
ship; they are simply part of the way it is.
Agile:

+10% to all Shiphandling Battleshy:

–10% to all Gunnery tests

Defiant:
Good:

tests in battle
+10% to all Gunnery tests Clumsy:
+5% to all Crew Checks
Cursed:

–10% to all Shiphandling tests in battle
Games Master may force crew to re-roll

Lucky:

Re-roll one failed Crew

Nimble:

check per day
+10% to all Shiphandling Fragile:

detection
–1 Hull

Reliable:

tests; –0.5m draft
+10% to all Shiphandling Foul:

+10% to all Crew Resilience tests

Stealthy:

tests
+10% to all Shiphandling Ill:

–5% to all Crew Checks

Sturdy:
Sweet:

tests to avoid detection
+1 Hull
+10% to all Crew

Unreliable:
Slow:

–10% to all Shiphandling tests
–2m/–2 km movement

Swift:

Resilience tests
+2m/+2 km Movement

Sluggish:

–10% to all Shiphandling tests; +0.5m

Distinctive:

one successful Crew check per day
–10% to all Shiphandling tests to avoid

draft

A Day at Sea

Each 12 hour period spent sailing or boating, the captain of a ship must test his
Shiphandling (or Boating) skill. If the test is successful, the ship makes it through the
day’s travel without incident. If the captain fails his Shiphandling Skill Test, the ship’s
Seaworthiness is reduced by a single point.

Vessel Damage

A ship can meet its end in one of two ways. A ship that loses all its Seaworthiness points
will begin taking on water at a rate faster than the water can be expelled, causing it to
sink. A ship may also be destroyed through the loss of all its Structure Points as a result
of damage from weather and enemies.

Seaworthiness

All ships are fashioned from timber and nails, and all of them continually take on
water. The question is exactly how much water. Bailing water from a ship’s bilge is a
normal part of a sailor’s daily duties and larger ships always carry at least one carpenter
(and spare lumber) to make emergency repairs when needed.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

113

So long as a ship has at least one Seaworthiness point remaining, the water comes into
the ship at a slower rate than it is expelled by the actions of the crew. One the ship’s
Seaworthiness falls to zero, its day is done. The vessel will begin to swamp, a process
that takes one Combat Round for every metre of the ship’s length. When a ship is fully
swamped, it will sink.
Every time a ship suffers five or more points of structural damage from a single attack
(after the Hull has been deducted), reduce the Seaworthiness of the ship by one point
per five points of damage.
For Example: The Dark Endeavour, a longship caught in a vicious sea-battle, is rammed
by a vengeful trireme. This causes 15 points of damage, reduced to 12 once the longship’s
Hull has been deducted. The attack also reduces the Dark Endeavour’s Seaworthiness by
2 points.

Structure Points

Ships take damage from a variety of sources – the lashing winds of a terrible storm or
the merciless ram of an attacking warship. A ship’s Structure Points are exactly like a
human’s Hit Points, just as a ship’s hull is exactly like a human’s armour. Any incoming
blow is first compared to the ship’s current Hull rating. If the damage is less than or
equal to the Hull rating, the blow causes no damage. If it is greater, the hull’s rating
is subtracted from the damage. Any damage remaining is deducted from the ship’s
Structure Points.
If a ship’s Structure Points are ever reduced to zero, the ship immediately begins to
break apart. What remains is useful only as life rafts for the surviving crew.

Dangers
The sea is a dangerous place to be. Even without the potential dangers of enemy ships,
monsters and pirates, threats such as storms and fires can imperil a ship.

Careening

The warm waters of many oceans are a paradise for weeds, worms and other parasites,
and a ship will quickly find itself befouled by all manner of things clinging to its
lower hull. These weeds create drag, slowing a ship down considerably. A wise captain,
therefore, will careen his vessel regularly, to keep it moving swiftly and smoothly
through the ocean.
Each week of sailing, roll 1D6. On a 6, then the ship’s speed drops by three metres/two
kilometres until it is careened.
To careen a ship, it must be beached or put into a dock. The crew then scrape the
bottom clear of debris. This takes 1D3 days and a successful Shiphandling check. Each
successful attempt at careening brings the ship’s speed back up by three metres/two
kilometres.

114

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Fire

Small fires are very common aboard ships, though they are always carefully contained.
A fire that escapes control is, however, a real danger to a ship. If not extinguished, an
uncontrolled fire aboard a ship will grow one size category every 2D6 minutes.
The ship’s Hull rating does not protect it against fire damage, though the fire will certainly
damage the ship. Every Combat Round during which the fire rages, the Games Master
should roll damage dice and apply the damage directly to the ship’s Structure Points.

Monsters

There are creatures in the briny deep larger and stronger than anything found on land.
Most sea creatures will not attack a ship on the open sea unless they are controlled or
starving – a ship is very large and very unappetising, after all. Naturally, if the people
aboard the ship are busily lobbing harpoons at the beast, it will likely decide to either
flee or make them stop.

Running Aground

Reefs and sandbars spell the doom for more ships than any pirate. If an unexpected
reef lies ahead on the ship’s course, then the lookout is permitted a Perception test to
notice the reef, and then the helmsman may make a Shiphandling test to avoid it. If
this fails, then the ship risks running aground. Roll 1D6 x (1D6–2) for the depth of
the reef below the water (if the result is negative, then the reef actually pokes above the
surface). The ship takes 3D4 points of Structural damage and loses an equal amount
of Seaworthiness for every metre of the ship’s draft that strikes the reef. For example, if
a ship with a draft of five metres runs into a reef that is three metres below the surface,
then it takes 6D4 damage. If the ship is still seaworthy, then it can possibly be floated
off the reef at high tide by lightening it.

Storms

Greater than monsters, greater than fire, the most terrible danger facing a ship at sea is
the weather. Much like monsters, storms occur as part of the Games Master’s plot for
the Legend session. The wind and the sea combine to strike at the tossing ship with a
primal fury, as masts creak and crack in the gale, leaks spray water into the hold and
cargo bursts its ties to tumble about the storm-wracked deck.
For a ship to survive a storm intact, the captain must employ his Shiphandling skill (or
Boating skill, as appropriate) to keep the vessel steady and turned into the storm. If the
Skill Test is successful, the ship endures one hour of storm weather at a cost of only one
Seaworthiness. If the Skill Test fails, the ship endures one hour of storm weather at a
cost 1D6 Seaworthiness.

Naval Equipment and Personnel
It has often been said that a boat is a hole in the water you must fill with money.
Although Legend streamlines the process of buying and repairing ships immensely,
Adventurers will find that owning their own ship is an expensive undertaking.
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

115

Like any other item, the cost for ships and their equipment varies from place to place. Most
of the larger ships are unavailable in any settlement size smaller than a small city. As with all
equipment, the costs given for ships in the descriptions are the small city prices. Rams and
engines cannot be acquired outside of a small or large city.

Personnel

Unlike equipment, ship personnel do not vary in price from place-to-place. Each
shipboard job has a standard daily pay rate, which the personnel will expect, whether
they are hired in a small village or a great city.
Ship Personnel
Position
Navigator
Oarsmaster
Officer
Rower
Sailor

Daily Pay
15 SP
12 SP
18 SP
4 SP (or free if slaves)
8 SP

Weapons

This section deals with various shipboard weapons. Of course, there are a vast number
of items needed to operate a ship effectively and efficiently, but such things as rope,
sailcloth and other sundries are included in the costs for maintenance and repair of a
ship.
Arbalest, Siege: A siege arbalest is essentially a large crossbow. Serviceable by one man,
it takes a full minute to load and requires a stand to support it. The bolts fired from an
arbalest are too big to be affected by the Common Magic spell Multimissile.
Ballista: A ballista is a much larger and deadlier version of the arbalest, requiring at
least three men to crew it. The bolts fired from an arbalest are too big to be affected by
the Common Magic spell Multimissile.
Cannon
Weapon
9-pound
(demi-culverin)
18-pound
(culverin)
24-pound
(demi-cannon)
45-pound
(cannon)
Swivel Gun

116

Skill
Gunnery

Damage Range
4D6
100m

Crew
Shots/ton
Required of Ammo Load
1
50
Special

Cost
5,000 SP

Gunnery

4D8

80m

2

25

Special

10,000 SP

Gunnery

4D12

100m

2

15

Special

13,000 SP

Gunnery

4D20

80m

3

10

Special

25,000 SP

Gunnery

3D6

50m

1

50

5 rounds 3,000 SP

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Cannon: There are several sizes of cannon used on board ships. There are also swivel
guns, which are smaller pieces mounted on the deck of a ship, and are used to blast
smaller boats or for precise shooting. See the Cannon table for more details.
Reloading Cannons: The time it takes to reload a cannon depends on the operator’s
Gunnery skill.

Gunnery Skill
<25%
26%-50%
51-75%
76%-100%
101%+

Combat Actions to
reload (character scale)
25
20
15
10
5

Number of Crew Combat rounds
to reload (Crew Combat scale)
1D6
1D4
1D3
1D2
1

Ram: A ram is a heavy metal spike attached to the front of a warship, used to stave in
the hulls of enemy ships. A ram differs in size and price depending upon the kind of
ship it will be attached to. If a ram is included in the ship’s construction, it increases
the ship’s price by 10%. If it is added later, the additional work needed to reinforce the
ship’s structure will raise the ram’s price to 15% of the ship’s original purchase price.
Springal: The springal is a small catapult, designed to lob its ammunition in an arc
at the enemy. The ammunition fired from a springal is too big to be affected by the
Common Magic spell Multimissile.

Ship/Siege Weapons
Weapon Damage
Siege
2D6+4
Arbalest
Ballista 4D6+2
Springal 2D10+2

Damage
Modifier
N

Range
200m

N

200m

N

250m

STR/
Combat
Load DEX Size Manoeuvres
4
12/10 E
Impale,
Sunder
6
12/11 E
Impale,
Sunder
4
10/10 E
Bash, Sunder

AP/
ENC HP Cost
6
6/12 800 SP
10

6/14 1,200 SP

12

6/12 1,000 SP

Repair
One thing is certain about a ship – it will always be in need of repair. Ships lose
Seaworthiness as part of their normal operation, wear and tear that must be attended
to eventually. In addition to this is the damage to a ship’s Structure Points that occur
through combat.

Cost of Repair

For the sake of simplicity, all the various items needed for repairing a ship, from
sailcloth to tar to cured timber, are bundled together into basic prices. A ship requires
10 Silvers worth of materials to repair every lost point of Seaworthiness. Repairing lost
Structure Points requires 100 Silvers worth of materials for every point.
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

117

Repair Crews

A standard repair crew can repair ten points of Seaworthiness or four Structure Points
per day on a beached or dry docked ship. A repair crew consists of the ship’s carpenter
and five men under his direct supervision. For every crew member less than five
decreases the amount of repair done by 10% (round up), for each additional member
of the repair crew the totals are increased by 10% (round down).
If he is working alone, a ship’s carpenter can repair three points of Seaworthiness or one
structure point per day on a beached or dry docked ship.

Repairs at Sea

Many ship captains wisely carry repair materials and a carpenter on board their
ship at all times, in order to make emergency repairs after (or during) a storm or
engagement with a monster or enemy ship.
While at sea, it is extremely hard to repair damage. Any Craft (Woodworking) Skill
Tests suffer a –40% penalty.
When attempting to repair a ship at sea, the carpenter must attempt a Craft
(Woodworking) Skill Test every 12 hours. Success indicates he has repaired one
lost point of lost Seaworthiness or one structure point. This can be increased by an
additional +1d4 points if there are sufficient crewmen available to form a work squad.
If the ship’s carpenter fails his Craft (Woodworking) Skill Test, no repairs are made but
the supplies used in the attempt are still consumed.

Dry Docks

Aside from magic (which offers near immediate repair), dry docking a ship is the best
way to repair it. A dry dock is normally only available in small cities or larger and cost
50 Silver per day to rent (or 100 Silver per day in a large city).

Beaching a Ship

Beaching a ship is normally only done in the most dire circumstances. Canoes, rowboats
and rafts can be beached with impunity, although even they have a 25% chance of
losing a point of Seaworthiness when they do so.
Beaching other ships requires the crew to make a Shiphandling or Boating test with a
penalty of between 0% and 100%, depending upon the suitability of the beach and the
time chosen. If the ship is carefully sailed into shallow waters, then slowly rolled onto
its side by moving cargo and other weight, then the penalty is lessened. Sailing onto the
shore in the teeth of a fierce storm incurs a much bigger penalty. Success on this test
merely results in the ship losing 1D6 Seaworthiness and 1D6 Structure Points. Failure
results in the ship losing its draft x D10 (minimum of 1D10) in both Seaworthiness and
Structure Points, as the ship effectively crashes into the shore.

118

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

BEASTS & COHORTS
Mounts, beasts of burden and other animals are covered in this chapter. Whilst most
Adventurers are going to be concerned with animals that help them get from one place
to another, or a mount to ride into battle, the necessity for domesticated animals in
more mundane, everyday pursuits (ploughing, carting and so on) are also covered here.
So too are pets – either as companions or as familiars for magic-using professions.

Beasts, Pets and Steeds
This section offers descriptions of a variety of living creatures for Adventurers to
purchase in the course of their travels. Some are as common as a mule or draft horse;
others might be a bit more unusual, such as a trollish watch beetle.
The Beasts, Pets and Steeds table shows a large variety of animals available for
purchase (if the Games Master allows). Each entry includes the animal and three costs
– untrained, basic trained and skilled:
Untrained: An untrained animal will need to be trained by the owner or an expert in
that particular field. Training an animal is handled in the same way as any construction
project with the trainer using the Lore (Animal) skill to train the beast. The Task Round
is two weeks and the best starts as Untrained. Each 25% contributes to the training
level: 50% is Basic Trained, 75% is Skilled and 100% or more is Battle Trained. Battle
Training is only necessary where an animal will be used in combat or warfare; otherwise
the training does not need to go that far.
Basic Trained: An animal that has been basic trained knows that the buyer is its new
master and will obey several basic commands, making it much easier to get along with
as a pet or mount. There is no bonus or penalty to any Skill Tests concerning the animal
at all but it cannot be used for combat or battle and, if the creature is placed under any
undue stress, then the owner suffers a –20% penalty to appropriate Skill Tests.
Skilled: Any animal that is considered Skilled has received and integrated a good
amount of its training, and will respond generally how the owner commands in most
situations. There is a +10% bonus to any Lore (Animal), Ride and Drive Skill Tests
concerning the animal. The creature cannot be used in combat or battle.
Battle Trained: The animal has been conditioned for high-stress situations and can be
used as a war-mount or other resource in combat and conflict. The owner suffers no
penalties using the beast in these conditions.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

119

Creature Descriptions

Baboon: Baboons are large, ground-dwelling monkeys.
Bear, Brown: Large and powerful omnivores, bears come in a variety of breeds, colours
and demeanours. The common brown bear is the most common across a multitude of
terrain types and has been ‘domesticated’ by several cultures.
Beetle, Giant: The largest beetles known, these creatures are commonly domesticated
by trolls and put to use as pack animals and mounts.
Bull/Cattle/Oxen: This rather large grouping contains all of the bovine species.
Cat: This is a basic, domesticated house or alley cat. Cats come in a vast variety of
colours, fur lengths and even general size. Good as wizardly familiars and adequately
intelligent, cats are a fantastic way to get rid of small vermin and scare off small
predators from a house or farm.
Crocodile: These large reptiles are an ancient species and almost always live near
swamps, marshes and rivers.
Deer: Dwelling mostly in fringe areas and forested terrains, common deer are a fantastic
source for leather-quality hide and a very healthy meat (venison).
Dog: This is a broad category that covers a wide number of canine species that are
commonly kept as pets.
Dog, War: This contains large, muscular breeds that have long and broad muzzles good
for gripping and pulling. They have the same statistics as a normal dog but with an
Bite skill of 65%, a Evade of 60%, STR 14, SIZ 12 and the ability to inflict 1D6+1D2
damage on a bite.
Elephant: Exceptionally large pachyderms with thick, wrinkled grey skin, elephants
are some of the largest land animals in existence.
Fowl: This is a very broad category of game and food birds like chickens (which are not
actually fowl), ducks, geese, pheasant and others like them. They are useful for their
eggs and their meat, and some people use their feathers or bones for crafts. Otherwise
they are strictly used as resource animals.
Goat: Among the most common farm animals in many cultures, goats have been used
for their milk, meat and even wool in some breeds. They are easily handled and are
relatively long-lived, meaning that a farmer can get the most out of a single goat before
having to put it to the blade. Goats tend to have hard and pointed horns on top of their
heads that can deliver a jarring blow if the goat can rear back a slight bit before butting.
Should a goat actually manage to butt someone with its horns (25%) the target will
not suffer any real damage but must pass an Athletics test to keep his balance or topple
from the impact.

120

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Griffin: Highly prized as a mount, a griffin is a large flying carnivore with the body of a
lion and the head, talons and wings of a great eagle. There are several subspecies known
to exist, such as the panther/raven or the snow tiger/owl combinations found in remote
jungles and mountains respectively.
Hawk/Falcon: This is another group entry for any number of predatory birds that
could be trained for falconry.
Horse, Draft: The largest horse breeds available, draft horses are immense equines that
are best used for heavy labour. They do not have bodies built for anything much other
than power, as they can pull several times their own weight with no problem, and have
near limitless endurance. Although they can be trained for combat situations, draft
horses are not suited for rapid movement or manoeuvring, making them less effective
steeds for combat-prone Adventurers. They are far better suited for hauling or pulling
wagons, carts and vehicles.
Horse, Pack: Caught somewhere between draft horses and riding horses, pack horses
are often the result of awkward breeding or uncommonly thick foals. They are not
as agile as riding horses and nowhere near as strong or large as draft horses, making
them best suited for use as carry-alls. Able to support a great deal of weight and keep
a decent pace alongside other horses, pack horses are similar to mules in disposition
and practicality. Owners of pack horses rarely ride them unless it is the only option, as
their raised shoulders and bony flanks rarely make for a comfortable ride. Pack horses
are very useful for groups of Adventurers who do not have access to a cart or wagon, as
they can carry considerable weight without slowing.
Horse, Riding: This is the standard horse seen under most Adventurers. A class of
horse that ranges in colour, temperament, fur length and even size to a degree, riding
horses are easily the most commonly found horses throughout Legend. Usable in a
variety of tasks that they will do well at, riding horses are decidedly average compared
to the rest of their species.
Horse, War: Large chargers, war horses are cut from physically powerful yet still agile
breeds to be used in battle. They are shown from a very early age that they can inflict
terrible damage with their thick, iron-shod hooves, and must not shy away from getting
cut or bludgeoned – as it will likely happen a great deal when the rider commits them
to battle. They tend to have short manes and cropped tails to keep from getting caught
up in weapons or armour, and many are commonly fitted with some form of barding.
They have the same statistics as a normal horses but with a Kick skill of 65%, STR 30,
SIZ 30 and the ability to inflict 1D8+1D12 damage on a kick.
Lion/Lioness: Nicknamed ‘the king of the jungle’ even though its primary territories
are savannah and plains areas, the lion has been a symbol of royalty and nobility for as
long as the idea has existed.
Lizard, Giant: These creatures are used as mounts by certain nomads, giant lizards are
large carnivores.
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

121

Mammoth: These beasts are immense herbivores that are the ancestors of common
elephants.
Mule: The infertile offspring of a male horse or pony and a female donkey, the mule
was originally one of nature’s little accidents that created a new tool for the world to
use. Mules are domesticated extremely easily, and are good pack animals for those who
cannot afford a proper horse or pony. They are occasionally noisy, ornery and tend
to bite at handlers they are unfamiliar with. Smaller than horses but slightly larger
than most ponies, mules have wiry fur and bristly manes between their longer ears.
They tend to be grey or brownish, but red mules have been known to exist when both
parents were of a richer colour. For all general purposes, treat a mule as you would a
pony, but with the carrying capacity of a riding horse.
Panther: One of the larger great hunting cats, the term ‘panther’ is normally used to
describe a black cougar, jaguar or leopard – though there are other different types of
great cat in this category.
Pig: This is the commonplace swine that dominates farms across the many worlds of
Legend. There have been farms dedicated to the raising, breeding and slaughtering of
pigs for as long as there have been livestock farmers. Pigs are easy to raise and upkeep,
and can be fed the leftovers from the family’s own supper plates, including rinds, bones
and unwanted grease! In fact, a group of hungry pigs will gladly eat anything thrown
into their feeding troughs – including humanoid bodies! They eat flesh, hair and bone
equally well and rather quickly, making large groups of pigs useful for getting rid of
incriminating evidence, should the watch be looking for a body!
Pigeon, Homing: A homing pigeon will return to the roost no matter how far away
it strays. These pigeons can deliver small scrolls of sensitive information to faraway
recipients. Once released, a homing pigeon has a 95% chance of returning to its roost
barring any outside interference and will travel 3D10x10 kilometres daily to do so.
Pony: What is basically a smaller breed of horse, true ponies are drastically shorter and
thinner than common riding horses. They make good mounts and steeds for smaller
races or children and can be used in cities as low-weight pack animals.
Rhino: Large, thick and somewhat dim-witted, the rhinoceros is a massive quadruped
with one or two long horns sprouting up from its leathery snout. Although herbivorous,
rhinos can be extremely aggressive and downright angry toward trespassers into their
surroundings. With a proper bucking of that horned head or a full charge, a rhino can
easily kill even an armoured target with a single spearing strike.
Rodent, Common: This is a very large group of animals that includes rats, mice,
shrews and most other small and commonplace rodents (including rabbits). Rodents
are rarely used for anything other than a food source for larger animals, or perhaps as
a wizardly familiar or tiny companion. Rodents are moderately intelligent and can be
taught tricks if rewarded properly. Even though some ‘rodents’ are not actually rodents
at all, such as shrews and moles, they are still lumped in with the more common
category for the ease of the seller.

122

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Sheep: One of the early livestock choices for hilly and grassland terrains, sheep are
raised in huge flocks to be used for wool and meat. They are commonly kept in massive
flocks of over 100 sheep by individual shepherds, who often keep them in line using
specially trained dogs. Rams are included in this category as well as common sheep, as
they are generally used for the same types of resources – save that ram’s wool is a bit
harsher and rams are commonly equipped with thick horns similar to those of a goat.
Snake: This is a broad category of non-venomous snakes that can be caught or bred for
sale. From constrictors to harmless vermin-catchers, snakes have been a fascination for
most cultures and a source of great fear for others – sometimes both. Adventurers tend
to be on the eccentric and unique side, so an animal breeder who has access to snakes
and serpents might be surprised to see the number of them he can sell. Whether used as
a pet, familiar or even to be released in a barn or cottage to rid the area of rats or mice,
snakes can be quite useful.
Snake, Venomous: This group category is far rarer to see at a common pet shop, as these
serpents are all of the venomous variety. Cobras, vipers, sea snakes and so forth are all
quite dangerous to others, and few would ever risk carrying one as a commodity. Sold
as familiars or as living weapons for unruly assassins, venomous snakes are extremely
dangerous to handle. Even if trained fully, a venomous snake is likely to strike at a fastmoving object reaching for it. Should the Games Master request it, a venomous snake
will strike at anything brought quickly into range of its fangs, unless a difficult (–20%)
Lore (Animal) Skill Test is passed.
Spider: While not a very common pet or companion, there are hundreds of species
of spiders throughout the Legend worlds that could be bottled up and sold. There
are terribly venomous species like the brown recluse or the thick-fanged bird-eating
spider that can be as large as a dinner plate. Many times, a spider is bought as a spell
component or ritual implement, although others might wish to have a spider on hand
for their own reasons. For whatever reason an Adventurer might buy a common spider,
the cost listed includes a proper jar, jug or box used to transport the arachnid.
Spider, Giant: Although the most common giant spider encountered is a web-spinner
that entraps Adventurers as a source of food, there are other breeds that could be
theoretically trained as all-terrain mounts. Although very difficult to train, a giant
tarantula or wolf spider could make an amazingly efficient steed. With a modified
saddle, a rider could be taken up walls or ceilings or even across spun-web bridges with
ease.
Tiger: Easily among the largest of the great cats, a tiger is a solitary hunter when not
with young, preferring to move alone through its territory in search of prey. Only
a viable mount for the extremely small and thin, tigers are often only purchased as
guardians of holy places or gladiatorial animals.
Wolf: Wild canines running in packs that can reach upwards of twenty individuals,
wolves are the quintessential pack hunters. Wolves are quite loyal after reaching the
‘Skilled’ training level and will view the handler as a pack mate. For this reason, if
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

123

Beasts, Pets and Steeds

124

Animal

Untrained

Basic Trained

Skilled

Baboon

75 Sp

125 SP

200 SP

Bear, Brown

200 SP

400 SP

800 SP

Beetle, Giant

250 SP

300 SP

350 SP

Bull/Cattle/Oxen

150 SP

200 SP

250 SP

Cat

1 SP

2 SP

3 SP

Crocodile

50 SP

100 SP

300 SP

Deer

10 SP

50 SP

100 SP

Dog, Domestic

1 SP

2 SP

3 SP

Dog, Hunting

10 SP

25 SP

35 SP

Dog, War

20 SP

40 SP

60 SP

Elephant

2,000 SP

5,000 SP

7,500 SP

Fowl

1 SP

3 SP

—

Goat

50 SP

75 SP

100 SP

Griffin

2,500 SP

6,000 SP

10,000 SP

Hawk/Falcon

150 SP

400 SP

600 SP

Horse, Draft

150 SP

400 SP

450 SP

Horse, Pack

100 SP

300 SP

350 SP

Horse, Riding

125 SP

350 SP

400SP

Horse, War

175 SP

400 SP

500 SP

Lion/Lioness

500 SP

1,000 SP

1,350 SP

Lizard, Giant

350 SP

600 SP

800 SP

Mammoth

2,500 SP

6,000 SP

8,500 SP

Mule

50 SP

125 SP

200 SP

Panther

450 SP

850 SP

1,000 SP

Pig

50 SP

60 SP

80 SP

Pigeon, Homing

25 SP

50 SP

—

Pony

80 SP

175 SP

225 SP

Rhino

3,000 SP

4,000 SP

8,000 SP

Rodent, Common

5 CP

1 SP

4 SP

Sea Lion

50 SP

100 SP

250 SP

Sheep

30 SP

40 SP

60 SP

Snake

50 SP

100 SP

200 SP

Snake, Venomous

250 SP

500 SP

750 SP

Spider

1 SP

2 SP

10 SP

Spider, Giant

200 SP

400 SP

500 SP

Tiger

500 SP

1,100 SP

1,500 SP

Wolf

200 SP

300 SP

400 SP

Zebra

300 SP

350 SP

400 SP

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

nothing
else,
wolves
make good adventuring
companions, if given the
right amount of training.
Zebra: An equine animal
very similar to a pack horse,
only faster and far more
ill-tempered, the zebra is
a black and white striped
creature that has always
drawn attention. Zebras
are captured for their
meat by some savannah
cultures and some even
to be broken and trained
as mounts. It is for their
exotic look that some
people try to keep zebras
for their own uses but
they do not make the best
mounts or companions due
to their ornery natures.

Hired
Companions
and Cohorts
This section covers a slew of
professionals that a common
Legend Adventurer could
hire for an extended period
of time in order to perform
some duty. The Hirelings
and Cohorts table on pages
136-139 includes each
profession’s title, the primary
and secondary skills of those
who follow the profession,
their general aptitude and
the cost to hire them per day
or use of service.

Accountant: This is someone who specialises in taking care of his employer’s money,
resources and overall assets. Accountants are also excellent at taking care of large
purchases in their employers’ names, such as a general sending his accountant to
purchase new shields for his troops.
Acolyte: Learned in the ways of religion and wonder, an acolyte is a member of a faith
devoted to the higher mysteries and miracles wielded by its highest members. Acolytes
tend to be willing to work for a pittance, as long as their work furthers the goals of the
cult or temple.
Advisor: Advisors are expected to have and express their opinions on all manners of
subjects for their employers. Many advisors are specialised in their knowledge but most
claim to be very well educated and versed in several topics. After all, a wide range of
knowledge makes them far more valuable.
Alchemist: This is a group of professions revolving around the use of chemicals, herbs
and minerals to create mixtures for a variety of purposes. From common scented oils
and relaxing salves to near-mystic potions that cure diseases and stave off infection,
alchemist goods are as numerous as the ingredients they mix them from.
Animal Trainer: Terribly useful for the Adventurer who wants a special mount or
companion but who does not have the time, patience or skill to train it themselves,
animal trainers are well suited for teaching a beast who is its real master. Using rewards,
playtime and even physical punishment at times, these hard-working folk make their
animals respect or fear them.
Apothecary: This is a general healer of ailments and minor wounds, skilled in the use
of salts, minerals and tinctures to mend flesh and banish sickness. Apothecaries are not
exceptionally skilled in deeper wounds or issues, but a quick stop in an apothecary shop
can fill an Adventurer’s pouch with an assortment of useful goods.
Armourer: An offshoot of the common blacksmith, an armourer specialises in the
creation, repair and modification of armour. Although only responsible for the grommets
and bindings for leather armour, a good armourer retains those types of goods as well.
Many armourers also take orders for barding as well as armour for individuals.
Barber: A combination of personal grooming and dentistry, a barber’s skills are diverse
and often sought out by Adventurers who do not get to see civilisation often. Barbers
do many things, from giving someone a haircut and a good shave, to providing a hot
towel and ripping out that rotten tooth that got chipped in a fight a month earlier.
They tend to be popular people in secluded areas, even if aspects of their trade seem
like an unnecessary luxuries.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

125

Barkeep: Barkeeps are professional bartenders, most often in charge of pubs or taverns.
Useful for more than filling bellies, a barkeep can also be a source of good advice from
many long nights of listening to patrons tell their tales. Having a good barkeep on the
payroll could be a great way for an Adventurer to spread rumours or information without
being directly involved. The counterpart to a barkeep, the bar wench is a common serving
maid. She is always watching the happenings in her tavern room, and is a good source of
information that might not reach the ears of some patrons or outsiders.
Blacksmith: The quintessential forger of common metal goods, a blacksmith is anyone
who operates a forge and hammers out metallic objects. There are several different
varieties of blacksmiths, some who specialise in iron and steel and others who are
only proficient in copper or bronze. A lot of what a blacksmith can forge is up to
the resources and advancement of the culture he is a part of. A blacksmith is the best
professional to go to for armour and weapon repairs when a specialist is not available,
as the basics are close to the same for all smithy work at that level.
Bowman: This category of soldier who specialises in ranged combat includes archers
and crossbowmen. Bowmen are commonly hired in units of 10-20 and they almost
always come prepared with their own weaponry.
Bowyer: This is the artisan responsible for the creation of bows and crossbows. Bowyers
carve, treat and bend the wood for bow-type weaponry, attaching the proper additional
implements to create the finished product.
Brewer: Specialists at creating alcoholic beverages from a variety of spices, grains and
fruits, brewers form a group of some of the most beloved artisans in society. They are
the makers of ale, spirits, grog and some rarer liquor and those goods go a very long
way in most cultures.
Burglar: There may come a time where an Adventurer needs something stolen or
reclaimed for him and in those cases it can be best if he has someone else do it. Hired
burglars may not be the most trustworthy louts but most are happy to earn their wage
in exchange for whatever bauble or trinket they had to pilfer.
Butcher: This is the bloody-handed labourer who takes livestock, fowl and game and
turns them into the various meats that fill the stew pots and stoves of the world. A
butcher is an expert at removing bones, hooves and scales from beasts in order to get to
the meat beneath or in order to save the resources provided by the animal at the time
of its slaughter.
Butler/Page: A general manservant that runs the basic needs of a household, a butler
(adult) or page (adolescent) is a must have for any large manor or estate. These
employees take care of many of a household’s common practices, such as laundry and
cleaning, or even the selection of everyday clothing and activities.
Carpenter: This is the professional responsible for woodworking and other wood crafts.
From toys and tools to the walls of a house, carpenters are the masters of woodcraft.

126

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Adventurers can also occasionally find carpenters who make the basic wooden bodies
of shields, but they are far more commonly going to sell such items to armourers.
Cartographer: In charge of writing, deciphering and translating maps, cartographers
are very useful to those Adventurers about to travel into unknown territory. A good
map can be worth more than the cartographer’s weight in gold and he is well aware of
the importance of his skill.
Cavalryman: This is a hired soldier that specialises in mounted combat. With a
charging blow from his lance or horseman’s flail he can send infantry reeling. Little else
can be considered faster on a battlefield.
Chandler: Masters of crafting with wax, chandlers are best known for their skill at
making candles and lamp mantles. They can also be fantastic sources for raw beeswax,
which has dozens of uses outside of simple light source manufacture.
Chef: This employee takes culinary ability to a new level each time he sets spice to pan
and pan to fire. Able to create masterpieces that are as tasty as they are beautiful, chefs
are normally reserved for high-class or noble establishments. Rarely can Adventurers
afford the types of dishes they create but those with the treasure-laden pockets of the
successful can indulge in them if they wish to!
Clerk: As common store or sales clerks, these men and women are the foot soldiers in
the eternal war for commerce. They are the front lines of the businesses, able to talk
about their products with passers-by and explain exactly why everyone needs one of
what they are selling. In addition to their selling duties, clerks also need to keep a sharp
eye out for shoplifters and con men looking to make a profit out of their own.
Cobbler: One of the most treasured but least thanked professions, cobblers make sure
that their customers have shoes and boots on their feet. Makers of all sorts of footwear,
they are rarely pressed to sell any shoe ‘off the rack’ due to individual fitting needs.
Coinsmith: This profession only exists in societies that use minted coins, as this
craftsman is responsible for pressing the proper amounts of precious metals into them.
Less exacting than a metalsmith who deals in the same types of metals, but far more
precise in the original moulding, a coinsmith must make sure that the ruling force
backing the coin he is pressing is happy with the results.
Cook: Another wielder of the culinary arts, a cook is a basic preparer of foodstuffs. Cooks
are good at turning staple foods into full meals using special seasonings and spices in
combination with crafty cooking methods. Some cooks might specialise in certain foods
or dishes but most will make do with whatever they are given to work with.
Cooper: A much specialised version of a carpenter, coopers make barrels, tuns and
kegs. They are responsible for bending, treating and binding wooden, liquid-storage
containers. It is their work that keeps a stout lager from leeching sweetness from maple
boards, or makes sure a good batch of bitters does not go sour due to a lack of waxed lids.
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

127

Courier: This is a hireling responsible for taking messages or packages from one place
to another.
Courtier: As a socialite and a diplomat, a courtier excels at getting his point across in
subtle and polite ways. A good courtier will sway opinions and objections to the way of
his employer without anyone realising he has done so.
Delegate: Simply put, this person is sent to some official meeting or similar event
to acts as an extension of his employer’s voice. Delegates are paid to say or represent
something very specific on behalf of their employer and they do not stray from their
course unless they do not wish to work as a delegate ever again.
Doctor: Doctors are not put off by severed digits or cleft muscles, and do everything in
their power to mend flesh and save lives. Some doctors also deal with mental disorders
or anxieties, but those are farther and fewer apart.
Driver: Also called a teamster, a driver is skilled at handling teams of animals that are
drawing some kind of vehicle. Most adept at wagon and carriage driving, there are also
some specialised drivers that use dog sleds or other vehicles.
Dyer: This is someone who is in charge of dyeing cloth or clothing. Dyers also dye the
wool for others to make their own fabrics from, but their primary role is to sell dyed
fabric.
Engineer: These individuals are responsible for designing and building the large
constructions and mechanisms that are used in siege machines, drawbridges and
portcullis. Having a good engineer on hand during a siege or a sacking of a walled city
is never a bad thing.
Entertainer: Skilled in song, dance or any number of talents that would classify them
as ‘entertainers’, these professionals spend their lives trying to make the masses enjoy a
few hours of their lives at a time.
Farmer (agricultural): Members of one of the oldest professions, farmers that tend
their fields and gardens yield a massive amount of food that is seen in city markets and
village grocers.
Farmer (livestock): The opposite side of the farming coin, livestock farmers raise fowl,
sheep, pigs or cattle for the purposes of their resource materials. Milk, cheese, wool and
meat can all contribute toward a livestock farmer’s income, and any Adventurer that
could sponsor or hire one can expect to never be without these items.
Fisherman: Hunters of the rivers, lakes and seas, fishermen pull their living by hook,
net or spear out of the water. Fishermen tend to live near their favourite fishing areas
and some may even have boats or ships to get the best catches they can.

128

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Fletcher: These caretaking individuals are responsible for ‘fletching:’ plucking,
cutting, waxing and applying the feathers to arrows and crossbow bolts. Without their
handiwork, archers’ and hunters’ bows would have less than half of their accuracy,
especially over longer distances. Fletchers are often very close to local carpenters and
blacksmiths.
Furrier: Only slightly different from a common tanner, furriers can take a piece
of mink, beaver or similar hide and clean it so that the fur is not harmed and stays
intact. Soft furs are a must in many industries, especially in winter climates where
their warmth is an asset. Also, armourers tend to want furs to line their stiff or harder
armour segments.
Gemcutter: Members of a rare but useful profession, gemcutters turn raw stones into
jewellery-grade gems. This increases the value of the gems tremendously depending on
the skill of the cutter, which is why so many Adventurers who find raw gems quickly
seek one out. A few hours of chiselling and chipping and a single chunk of raw stone
can be turned into several smaller ones – each worth more than the original.
Guard: These comprise one of the most common soldier types to be seen in any
culture. Guards are simple swordsmen that are paid to stand watch over a particular
place or thing, raising an alarm if need be. They are not a frequent asset for starting
Adventurers but those who have earned holdings or small fortunes might want to have
extra sets of eyes while they are away.
Guide: No matter where an Adventurer goes, he will likely need someone to help him
find his way at some point. Some might believe that they are better off finding their
own paths but a good and knowledgeable guide can save time, and lives.
Healer: When disease, illness and infection are wracking a body, a healer is called for
or sought out. Healers use a mixture of alchemy and faith to strengthen the body’s
defences and help fight the bad elements within it.
Herald: Adventurers rarely wish to be introduced boldly or loudly unless they are
trying to make an entrance (or lying about their true natures) but a hired herald is the
perfect way to do so.
Hunter: Whether they are hunting dangerous predators to protect a village or venturing
out to come back with drags full of deer and elk, the idea is the same – hunters brave
the wilderness to track, hunt and kill animals.
Interpreter: With a multitude of races, species and cultures that exist there are a great
many barriers that must be overcome every day by travelling Adventurers. A single
mishap or miscommunication could result in violence or missed opportunities. The
best way around this is to quickly hire a learned interpreter, who will happily let both
sides of the conversation know what is being said by the other.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

129

Jester: This is a specialised form of entertainer who is talented at social humour as well
as physical gags. Through the use of puns, metaphor and comedic anecdotes a jester
can give the highest of nobility a satirical ribbing that is risqué and ultimately easier to
swallow than the scandalous behaviour it is based on.
Jeweller: These are the skilled artisans and craftsmen that take small amounts of
precious metals and other materials and turn them into elegant pieces of jewellery.
Labourer: Nothing more than hired muscle used to lift and carry, labourers are found
anywhere there is physical work to be had. They are cheap and replaceable – perfect for
some Adventurer’s needs.
Leatherworker: Leatherworkers are masters of taking simple hides that have been
treated by a tanner and turning them into an assortment of useful goods. Responsible
for the creation of leather armour segments before they go off to the armourer to
be riveted together, a leatherworker can be a much cheaper option for fixing leather
armour.
Locksmith: Masters of tumblers and slides, locksmiths are useful for both setting up
and getting past the mechanical safeguards on doors, chests and gates. Having a skilled
locksmith at an Adventurer’s disposal can be a huge boon when trying to get into
barred places or when keeping others from learning secrets.
Maid: Maids are professional cleaners who are expected to go about a home or estate
and make sure that the items and valuables are presentable for company. This is, of
course, a position of great trust – and commonly worries for the employer. Maids are
very useful to be hired by outside influences to conveniently leave open windows or
doors for later use.
Man at Arms: Professional soldiers trained for nothing but combat, men at arms
are rarely hired in groups smaller than 20 and are used for some of the most direct
confrontations. Skilled with swords and spears, a unit of men at arms is a fearful sight
to see marching in formation toward an enemy and can be well worth an Adventurer’s
coin to uproot a dug-in enemy.
Metalsmith: This is a group of professionals with several different names and titles
depending on what sort of metal they are in charge of smelting and forging. Goldsmiths,
coppersmiths and silversmiths work in their unsurprising fields and braziers work in
brass. Depending on what manner of work is needed of them, any of these metalsmiths
can plate, coat or forge items for their employers.
Midwife: This is a type of nursemaid or in-home caretaker that often specialises in the
birthing of children. Midwives are good at not only keeping the mother-to-be and the
infant healthy but also are schooled in how to help around the home for the first few
days while the new mother recuperates.

130

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Miller: In charge of creating mash and flour at grain mills, millers must be skilled not
only at the loading and unloading of the millstone but also of the bagging, storage and
selling of the resulting products. Hiring a miller also normally means having access to
the mill itself, which is quite possibly why an Adventurer would want to go out of his
way to hire one.
Navigator: A guide on a larger scale, navigators are good at picking directions and
steering travel using the sun, moon and stars. Whether trying to find a way out of
thick wilderness without a map or bringing a ship to port in the endless blue of a night
time sea, hiring a navigator is money well spent should the alternative be getting lost
forever.
Nurse: Whether the nurse is a doctor in training or happy being an assistant, he is a
useful aid in all medical matters. Like an extra pair of hands for a doctor or surgeon,
nurses are well-versed in the healing arts.
Painter, artiste: These are masters of portraits, mosaics and other beautiful imagery
made with dyes, oils and pastes.
Painter, limner: Although their use of dyes and paint washes are no less exacting than
that of artistes, ‘limners’ are in charge of painting large structures, signs and the like.
They must know how to write adequately legibly, as their signs must be readable.
Papermaker: Buying paper from a scribe can be a fool’s gamble when there is a local
papermaker available. Pressing the pulp or reeds into sheets to be dried and pulled into
parchment, papyrus and scroll vellum, papermakers have a trade that is rarely utilised
by the underclass and is the crutch for many other artisans and noble roles.
Pikeman: Soldiers trained to use longspears or halberds, pikemen are the best type of
martial hireling to set against enemy cavalry. Most effective in dual lines that number
eight or ten each, pikemen are generally well-armoured to absorb the impact of those
who make it past their bristling wall of weapons.
Porter: This is a class of labourer whose only role is to carry something from one place
to another. Porters are often in charge of objects bigger than what a courier would take
but not quite as large and heavy as what a labourer would be called in for.
Potter: Crafters of vases, urns and clayware, potters are quite a popular class of artisan.
Examples of their craft include everything from sun-dried water jugs to exquisite, finely
enamelled burial urns. It seems that there is not a walk of life that cannot find use for
a potter’s wares.
Priest/Priestess: Higher in the classification of the faithful than mere acolytes, priests
and priestesses are in charge of many more duties and roles in their order or cult.
Buying time away from their patronages is difficult and expensive, but could be well

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

131

worth the extra effort and cost. Priests and priestesses have permission from their elders
to perform greater rituals and works in their faith, and Adventurers that are not of
opposing faiths can benefit greatly from them.
Prostitute: The so-called ‘oldest profession’, prostitution varies in legality and
acceptance from culture to culture, with some viewing it as normal and necessary and
others considering it a hanging offence.
Sage/Soothsayer: Holders of great knowledge, sages and soothsayers dole out nuggets
of insight for a handful of coins.
Sailor: When someone needs to row or sail a boat across a large enough body of water
a team of sailors is a must. They are skilled at the needs of boating, and can make
adjustments for tide, current and weather that a common passenger would never be
able to manage. Also, oceanic sailors tend to be well-travelled and full of stories and
tales from all the places they have seen, which could be worth a few rounds’ worth of
grog to an interested Adventurer.
Scribe: This is a professional writer, who makes his living putting others’ words down
on parchment or arranging already written works to be purchased by others.
Sculptor: Shaping marble and stone with chisel and rasp, sculptors are commonly very
patient artistes that are capable of creating awe inspiring and dazzling statues from
blocks of raw stone. Their work is long and tedious, but stands against the tests of time
when carved with skill and care. Anything permanent cast in a sculptor’s wares will last
long beyond that which was sculpted, barring any accident or intervention.
Seamstress: Minor repairs and quick fixes are a seamstress’ common work, setting
needle and thread to patching holes and trimming hems in short order. Their work
tends to be fast and efficient, leaving more drawn out jobs to tailors.
Shepherd: A specialised form of livestock farmer, shepherds use dogs to keep huge
flocks of sheep or goats manageable as they graze hills and fields. They must always be
wary of predators and poachers and cannot allow members of the flock to stray too far
away.

132

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Shipwright: These specialist carpenters focus their efforts on building (and repairing)
boats, canoes, kayaks and sailing vessels.
Surgeon: Surgeons are steady-handed professionals that know they are the last line
between life and death, and their skilled decisions could mean saving the person in
front of them. Adventurers, who are well-known for sustaining horrible wounds in
their travels and questing, should always keep in mind the location of the closest
surgeon in case of emergency.
Tailor: Crafters of all things made of cloth or canvas, tailors are one of the building
blocks of any society. Their wares can be found on the backs of every citizen, covering
the beds of their homes and hanging from the masts of ships.
Tanner: These skilled workers take freshly cut hides and turn them into the leather and
suede that is then forwarded on to leatherworkers and tailors to be made into various
products.
Undertaker: A morbidly useful career, undertakers put the dead to final rest. They are
in charge of coffin-ordering, cremations and burials for the recently deceased. In large
enough communities the dead could stack up quickly without their efforts, making for
foul environmental conditions riddled with stench and disease.
Vintner: This is the high-class version of a brewer skilled in the ways of wine and winemaking. It is a business that often comes with wealth and prestige and the best wineries
are known not by their goods but by the names of their owners.
Weaponsmith: This is a specialised form of blacksmith who creates the weapons
wielded by Adventurers. They are also the best people to go to for weapon repairs and
modifications.
Yeoman: This type of ‘landed’ soldier is a specialist with a longbow. Typically hired
in groups of a dozen or more, a yeoman unit volleying their shots into the enemy
from hundreds of paces away can destroy a unit’s morale, even if it does not kill them
physically.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

133

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Profession
Accountant
Acolyte
Advisor
Alchemist
Animal Trainer
Apothecary
Armourer
Barber
Barkeep
Blacksmith
Bowman
Bowyer
Brewer
Burglar
Butcher
Butler/Page
Carpenter
Cartographer
Cavalryman
Chandler
Chef

Hirelings and Cohorts

134

Primary Skill
Lore (Appraisal)
Lore (Religion)
Influence
Lore (Alchemy)
Lore (Animal)
Healing
Craft (Armourer)
Craft (Grooming)
Craft (Libations)
Craft (Blacksmith)
Bow or Crossbow
Craft (Bowyer)
Craft (Brewer)
Stealth
Craft (Butcher)
Craft (Husbandry)
Craft (Carpenter)
Craft (Cartography)
Spear or Flail
Craft (Candlemaking)
Craft (Cooking)

Primary Aptitude
60%
70%
65%
75%
60%
45%
65%
70%
65%
70%
50%
60%
70%
60%
70%
60%
65%
70%
60%
75%
70%

Secondary Skill
Evaluate
Culture (Own)
Insight
Mechanisms
Ride
Lore (Alchemy)
Craft (Metalsmith)
First Aid
Influence
Craft (Metalsmith)
Craft (Bowyer)
Craft (Fletcher)
Craft (Cooper)
Athletics
Craft (Cooking)
Influence
Engineering
Lore (Roads and Paths)
Ride
Craft (Waxen)
Lore (Cuisine)

Secondary
Aptitude
40%
50%
50%
35%
50%
30%
40%
30%
40%
35%
35%
30%
25%
45%
45%
55%
35%
40%
55%
50%
55%

Cost per Day/Use (wage)
1 SP
5 CP1
1 SP
5 SP1
1 SP
6 CP
2 SP1
3 CP
4 CP
1 SP1
8 CP
5 CP1
3 CP1
100 SP
2 CP1
5 CP
2 CP1
3 SP1
1 SP
2 CP1
4 SP1

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Influence
Craft (Cobbler)
Craft (Minting)
Craft (Cooking)
Craft (Barrel-making)
Ride or Drive
Influence
Influence
First Aid
Drive
Craft (Dyeing)
Engineering
Acrobatics, Dance, Play
Instrument or Sing
Craft (Farming)
Lore (Animal – varies)
Craft (Fishing)
Craft (Fletcher)
Tracking
Craft (Gemcutting)
Sword and Shield, Spear
and Shield or Polearm
Lore (Regional)

Clerk
Cobbler
Coinsmith
Cook
Cooper
Courier
Courtier
Delegate
Doctor
Driver
Dyer
Engineer
Entertainer

Guide

Farmer (agricultural)
Farmer (livestock)
Fisherman
Fletcher
Furrier
Gemcutter
Guard

Primary Skill

Profession

135

60%

50%
50%
65%
65%
70%
70%
50%

50%
65%
70%
50%
65%
40%
70%
60%
75%
60%
70%
65%
65%

Culture (any) or
Survival

Lore (Regional)
Lore (Regional)
Lore (Regional)
Craft (Bowyer)
Craft (Tanner)
Craft (Jeweller)
Perception

Evaluate
Craft (Leatherworking)
Craft (Metalsmith)
Lore (Cuisine)
Craft (Carpentry)
Streetwise
Insight or Seduction
Lore (Politics)
Healing
Lore (Equine)
Craft (Tailor)
Mechanisms
Influence

Primary Aptitude Secondary Skill

40%

40%
40%
35%
30%
40%
35%
35%

40%
30%
35%
25%
40%
35%
40%
50%
50%
45%
30%
30%
45%

Secondary
Aptitude

6 CP

1 CP
1 CP
5 CP
4 CP1
7 CP1
2 SP1
5 CP

3 CP
4 CP1
7 CP1
4 CP1
3 CP
1 SP
50 SP
60 SP
10 SP
4 CP
2 CP1
1 SP1
1 SP

Cost per Day/Use (wage)

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Craft (Jeweller)
Athletics
Craft (Leatherworking)
Mechanisms
Craft (Cleaning)
Sword and Shield, Spear
and Shield or Polearm
Craft (Metalsmith)
Craft (Midwifery)
Craft (Milling)
Lore (Regional)
First Aid
Craft (Painting)
Craft (Painting)
Craft (Papermaking)
Spear or Polearm
Athletics

Jeweller
Labourer
Leatherworker
Locksmith
Maid
Man at Arms

Metalsmith
Midwife
Miller
Navigator
Nurse
Painter, artiste
Painter, limner
Papermaker
Pikeman
Porter

Primary Skill
Healing
Lore (Heraldry)
Survival
Language
Influence

Profession
Healer
Herald
Hunter
Interpreter
Jester

136
65%
40%
70%
60%
40%
65%
40%
60%
50%
40%

70%
65%
65%
60%
50%
55%

Primary Aptitude
50%
75%
65%
60%
75%

Evaluate
First Aid
Mechanisms
Survival
Healing
Evaluate
Craft (Dyeing)
Craft (Quill Cutting)
Sword and Shield
Streetwise

Secondary Skill
Lore (Alchemy)
Influence
Track
Evaluate
Acrobatics, Dance, Play
Instrument or Sing
Craft (Metalsmith)
Streetwise
Craft (Tanner)
Craft (Metalsmith)
Craft (Sewing)
Survival
45%
35%
30%
50%
20%
50%
20%
45%
40%
25%

40%
50%
30%
35%
40%
40%

Secondary
Aptitude
30%
50%
50%
40%
50%

8 CP1
3 CP
3 CP1
7 CP
2 SP
10 SP1
2 CP
1 SP1
1 SP
3 CP

1 SP1
1 CP
3 CP1
3 SP1
4 CP
1 SP

Cost per Day/Use (wage)
8 SP
2 SP
1 SP1
1 SP
2 SP

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Craft (Pottery)
Lore (Religion)
Seduction
Lore (Regional)
Boating or Shiphandling
Craft (Calligraphy)
Craft (Sculpting)
Craft (Sewing)
Lore (Goat/Sheep)
Craft (Shipbuilding)
Healing
Craft (Tailoring)
Craft (Tanning)
Craft (Mortuary Arts)
Craft (Winemaking)
Craft (Weaponsmith)
Bow

Potter
Priest/Priestess
Prostitute
Sage/Soothsayer
Sailor
Scribe
Sculptor
Seamstress
Shepherd
Shipwright
Surgeon
Tailor
Tanner
Undertaker
Vintner
Weaponsmith
Yeoman

65%
80%
65%
75%
65%
70%
65%
50%
75%
50%
75%
65%
70%
55%
70%
65%
65%

Craft (Painting)
Insight or Influence
Influence
Insight
Lore (Oceans and Seas)
Craft (Quill Cutting)
Craft (Pottery)
Craft (Tailoring)
Lore (Canine)
Boating
First Aid
Craft (Sewing)
Craft (Leatherworking)
First Aid
Lore (Wine)
Craft (Metalsmith)
Craft (Bowyer)

Primary Aptitude Secondary Skill
40%
60%
50%
50%
50%
35%
40%
35%
50%
35%
60%
45%
50%
35%
55%
40%
40%

Secondary
Aptitude
5 CP1
10 SP1
25 SP
10 SP
2 CP
2 SP1
6 CP1
2 CP1
1 CP
3 CP1
25 SP
6 CP1
6 CP1
4 CP
2 SP1
1 SP1
2 SP

Cost per Day/Use (wage)

1

This price is strictly for labour and time. Should the Adventurer purchase something, there may be an additional charge according to the item
purchased.

Primary Skill

Profession

137

ENCHANTMENTS
An enchantment is a permanent magical effect. As a permanent effect, it cannot be
easily dispelled, dismissed or neutralised. The creation of enchantments is reserved
for Sorcery. Common Magic practitioners cannot create enchantments – although
Common Magic spells can be used to create them.
Creating enchantments differs between the magical paths with each approach reflecting
the nature of the magic itself.

Sorcery Enchantments
The power of sorcery lies in its flexibility, and it is sorcery that is capable of creating
powerful enchanted items that need not be quested for or are temporary in nature. A
sorcerer with the requisite Grimoire (one that contains the Enchantment Ritual sorcery
spell) can take a mundane item – any mundane item – and created an enchanted one.
Naturally, such a potentially powerful effect does not come without a price. While
casting spells may only cost Magic Points, creating an enchanted item costs a sorcerer
permanent Magic Points. The exact cost depends upon what sort of enchantment is
being created – the more powerful the final enchantment will be, the higher the cost
in Magic Points.
Magic Points that are invested in an enchantment are put beyond use and are not
regained in the usual manner. If an enchantment is broken or dismantled by the
sorcerer who created it, his invested Magic Points are released back to him. If the
enchanted item is broken or destroyed by someone else, they are gone forever. Sorcerers
who have enchanted something are therefore highly protective of their enchantments
for precisely this reason.
Almost anything can be enchanted, from a scrap of paper, to a sword, to a ring, to the
Hit Location of a creature. The sorcerer must be able to inscribe the proper sigils and
formulae for the enchantment, however, so creatures without physical substance, such
as spirits, are impossible to enchant.
Just as any item can be enchanted, so too can any place. Sorcerers use enchantments
to protect their colleges, towers, lairs and grimoires from the depredations of enemies
and thieves.
Although an enchantment cannot be dispelled, dismissed or neutralised, it is hardly
invulnerable. An enchantment is only as strong as the object it is placed on. If that
object is broken, torn or destroyed, so too is the enchantment.

138

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Unless the enchantment has specific limitations to the contrary, anyone can use an
enchanted item.
Sorcerers creating enchantments can use Magic Points from a number of sources, as
follows:
•	
•	
•	

Their own Magic Points
Magic Points taken from others via the Tap spell
Magic Points stored in a Magic Point crystal

A sorcerer who relies on his own Magic Points cannot use those points until her
dissolves the enchantment, releasing them back to his own psyche. Magic Points taken
from another source – a crystal or Tapped subject – are lost to the sorcerer when the
enchantment is destroyed regardless of who does the destroying. Only personal Magic
Points can be recaptured.

Enchanting Ritual (Sorcery Spell)
Autonomous, Resist (Persistence)
The casting time for the spell depends on the amount of Magic Points being used in
the ritual, as shown on the Enchantment Times table on page 142.
Creating any enchantment requires this spell. It must be successfully cast as part of the
whole process of enchanting an item, which involves inscribing the sigils and formulae
in place and acts as a focus for conferring magical power.
If the Enchanting Ritual is being made on an unwilling, live, subject, the victim can
resist using Persistence in the normal way (Legend Core Rulebook, page 53). If the
Resistance is successful, then the Enchantment Ritual fails and the sorcerer cannot
attempt to enchant that person or creature again; it remains resistant to that sorcerer’s
attempts (other sorcerers, however, may make their own attempts).

Enchanting Process

The following describes in general the steps required to enchant an object, place or
person.

1. Preparation

The sorcerer must spend time in preparing the item to be enchanted: cleaning,
concentration, inscribing sigils and other formulae. In general, it takes 1 hour to
prepare items of less than SIZ 1 and 1 hour for each subsequent point of SIZ. If the
item is a specific Hit Location, then calculate the SIZ, and hence time, by dividing the
creature’s SIZ Characteristic by the total number of Hit Locations it has, and rounding
up. Thus, to enchant the arm of an average human (SIZ 11) the limb is considered
to have SIZ 2 (11/7 – the number of Hit Locations for a human – and rounded up).
Enchanting the limb of a giant – average SIZ 50 – would take 7 hours.
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

139

2. Declaration

When a sorcerer wishes to create an enchantment, he must inform the Games Master as
to the spells he intends to use, the item to be enchanted, any limitations or conditions
he wishes to place on the item and, of course, the total amount of Magic Points he will
expend in the process. The precise Magic Point cost varies according to the specifics
of the item.
The number of limitations or conditions the sorcerer can impose depends on his
Manipulation skill. He can impose one limitation or condition for every 10 points
(rounded-up) of Manipulation. Limitations are discussed later, but a limitation does
not cost any Magic Points to confer.

3. Procedure

The sorcerer must then spend a number of hours in casting the Enchanting Ritual
spell. This duration is equal to the Magic Points invested in the enchantment, squared.
This is summarised in the Enchantment Times table.
At the end of this time, the sorcerer makes a Sorcery (Grimoire) test. The roll is
modified by the type of enchantment being attempted and whether any conditions or
limitations are placed upon the enchantment.
If the roll succeeds, the necessary Magic Points are expended and the enchanted item is
created. If the roll fails, the Magic Points are retained but the enchantment fails.
A critical success when Enchanting allows an Adventurer to spend one fewer Magic
Points to create the final effect (to a minimum of one Magic Point).
A fumble results in the enchantment failing and one Magic Point is expended
regardless.

Enchantment Times
Enchantment’s Total Magic Points
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

140

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Hours To Enchant
1
4
9
16
25
36
49
64
81
100

Enchantment Attributes

Sorcerers can enchant items in several ways.

Common Magic Enchantments
Common Magic spells can be enchanted into an object:
It costs 1 Magic Point for 2 Magnitude of the Common Magic Spell. The sorcerer
must either know the spell, or have someone on-hand who does who forms part of the
Enchanting Ritual
The Common Magic spell is permanently bound into the enchantment. The spell works
as per the Common Magic spell description and with the same limitations, but the person
using it does not need to make a Common Magic skill use to activate the spell and neither
does he expend Magic Points doing so; he merely needs to state that he is using it – or the
magic works automatically.
The spell must usually be appropriate to the item. However, spells can be enchanted
into items that are worn, such as rings, talismans, charms and so on, that will confer
the magic when the wearer is using the appropriate conduit for the magic. Thus, a ring
with Bladesharp 3 is entirely possible, conferring the magical bonuses whenever the
wearer picks-up a weapon that can benefit from a Bladesharp spell.
When a Common Magic Spell from a sorcerously enchanted item is used, it cannot
automatically be used again; a certain period of time must elapse whilst the matrix
holding the magic in the item have a chance to rejuvenate. This ‘refresh’ time depends
on the nature of the user, as follows:
Sorcerer creating the enchantment	
A Named User of the Enchantment
Another Sorcerer	
Everyone Else

Minutes equal to the spell’s duration
Minutes equal to the spell’s duration x2
Minutes equal to the spell’s duration x3
Minutes equal to the spell’s duration x4

Named Users of an enchantment forms part of the enchantment’s conditions.

Sorcery Spell Enchantments
A sorcerer gains few benefits from creating an enchantment holding Sorcery spells he
already knows as part of his Grimoire. However, as a way of conferring Sorcery spells
on others, enchantments are an effective way of doing so.
It costs 6 Magic Points to work a Sorcery spell into an enchantment. The spell must
be part of a Grimoire the sorcerer already knows. However the sorcerer must also
stipulate what Manipulations influence the Sorcery spell he is investing into the item:
Magnitude, Range, Duration in minutes, or Targets. Combine is not compatible with
the Enchanting Ritual spell.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

141

The maximum number of Manipulations is dependent on the sorcerer’s Manipulation
skill in the same way the skill is used to influence the normal casting of Sorcery spells
and each Manipulation forms a Condition. Thus, a sorcerer with Manipulation 70%
can work seven Manipulations into a spell within an enchantment; a Magnitude 7
spell, or a Magnitude 3 spell with a Range of 50m x the sorcerer’s POW, or a spell with
a Duration of 4 x POW in minutes that affects up to 5 Targets. But each Manipulation
reduces the capacity for other Conditions.
When a Sorcery spell from an enchanted item is used, it cannot automatically be used again;
a certain period of time must elapse whilst the matrix holding the magic in the item has a
chance to rejuvenate. This ‘refresh’ time depends on the nature of the user, as follows:
Sorcerer creating the enchantment		
A Named User of the Enchantment		
Another Sorcerer				
Everyone Else				

1 Hour
1D2 Hours
1D4 Hours
1D6 Hours

Named Users of an enchantment forms part of the enchantment’s conditions.

Armouring Enchantment
A common enchantment magically increases the armour points of an object. Each
Magic Point invested in the Armouring Enchantment bestows one AP upon the
enchanted object. If it is used on a living creature, it will increase armour points in only
one Hit Location – multiple enchantments must be used to cover the entire creature.
Likewise, if placed on a suit of armour, each Armouring Enchantment will protect only
one Hit Location.
Armour Points created through this enchantment count as magical armour, meaning
that any spells that would normally ignore or negate regular and/or natural armour do
not negate or ignore APs granted by the Armouring Enchantment.

Binding
This enchantment is intended to confine an otherworldly spirit, such as a ghost, demon
or elemental. A Binding enchantment requires one Magic Point for every Characteristic
the creature possesses. Thus, a Binding enchantment intended to contain a ghost
requires three Magic Points to create (as a ghost only possesses INT, CHA and POW).
A Binding enchantment may only hold one creature at a time and the creature may
attempt to Resist the enchantment with its Spectral Combat skill in an Opposed Roll
against the sorcerer’s Grimoire skill.
Capturing a creature in a Binding enchantment requires either dissipating the creature
or somehow convincing it to inhabit the item voluntarily. Capturing a dissipating spirit
requires the Holdfast spell to be successfully cast. The sorcerer can use Holdfast to hold
3 Magic Points per 10% of his Sorcery (Grimoire) skill, preventing the spirit from
dissipating. However the spirit can still make attacks against the sorcerer unless he also
uses Spirit Resistance to protect himself from spectral harm.

142

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Once within the Binding, the creature remains there until it is freed, either through
the will of the item’s owner or the destruction of the Binding. A creature bound into
an item has no natural contact with the outside world and cannot perceive it in any
way unless it uses magic. Someone in physical contact with the binding can use it to
engage in mental communication with the creature (provided there are no limitations
to the contrary).
The owner of the Binding item has complete control over the creature bound within
and may access the creature’s knowledge, skills, Magic Points and known spells freely.
Many creatures are of little use while inside a Binding enchantment and must therefore
be freed if the binding’s owner wishes to use their abilities in combat or other situations.
A bound creature can be freed and commanded to perform one hour’s worth of activity
for the creature that freed it, after which it is truly free.
Note that most spirits utterly resent being captured by Sorcery in this way. Any spirit
that has not voluntarily entered into the Binding enchantment will, when freed, attack
the sorcerer who bound it there (and, if he is not present, seek-him out for future
revenge). How long, and how persistently, the spirit engages in this revenge depends on
the spirit’s strength, its nature and what services it has been subjected to whilst bound.

Warding Enchantment
One of the most demanding enchantments to complete, yet also one of the most in
demand. When the enchantment is complete, the Warded item generates an invisible,
magical barrier, detectable only by magic, that protects those within from specified
attacks or events that occur outside the Warded area.
The items need not be visible to be effective – they may easily be concealed within a
stone wall, for example.
Every Warding has a series of bans set by its creator during the process of enchantment.
For every Magic Point invested into the enchantment, the Warding can include one
ban (and all Wardings must have at least one ban). Bans include, but are not restricted
to: Banning those of (or not of ) a certain faith or race, specific people, spells, those not
holding a particular flower/weapon/symbol, virgins, incorporeal creatures, those who
do not speak a designated password upon approach, specific weapons.
Anyone within a radius equal to the invested Magic Points of the enchanted item
is considered to be within its Warded area. Against any banned effect or attack
originating from outside the Warded area, the protected creatures benefit from the
following effects:

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

143

•	
•	
•	

A Countermagic Shield of a Magnitude equal to the Warding’s invested Magic
Points.
An effect similar to the Consecrate spell of a Magnitude equal to the Warding’s
invested Magic Points, which will alert those inside if anything banned by the
Warding’s creator enters or attempts to enter the Warded area.
An effect similar to the Damage Resistance spell of a Magnitude equal to the
Warding’s invested Magic Points, where any incoming attack dealing damage
equal to or less than the Warding’s invested Magic Points is ignored.

This is not the greatest versatility of a Warded item, however. Two or more Wardings that
share the same bans (they do not necessarily need to be of equal Magic Points or even
created by the same enchanter) will automatically conjoin when brought within each
other’s radii and protect a far greater area than they could manage individually. When
doing so, add together all the invested Magic Points of the linked Wardings to determine
their Average Magic Points.
•	

•	

•	

•	

Two Warded items conjoin to form a Warding Wall. This stretches from one item
to the other and reaches Average Magic Points in metres in height and will stay
in effect as long as the Warded items remain within 5 + Average Magic Points in
metres from one another.
Three Warded items conjoin to form either a hinged Warding Wall or a Warding
Triangle, with walls as high as a Warding Wall’s. It will stay in effect for as long as
every Warded item remains within 10 + Average Magic Points in metres from one
other Warded item.
Four Warded items conjoin to form either a hinged Warding Wall or a Warding
Box (more commonly called a True Warding), with walls as high as a Warding
Wall’s. True Wardings, unlike Triangles and Walls, also cover the ‘ceiling’ of the
Warded area and the underneath (normally to a depth of one metre). It will stay in
effect for as long as every Warded item remains within 15 + Average Magic Points
in metres from one other Warded item.
Each additional Warded item increases the maximum distance that the items can
be placed apart by a further five metres.

Conditions

Every Sorcery enchantment can be modified by attaching conditions and limitations
during the enchanting process. Once placed on an item, conditions may never be
removed, expanded or added to.
The maximum number of conditions that can be placed on an enchantment is equal to
the sorcerer’s Manipulation divided by 10 and rounded up. Manipulations to Sorcery
spells count as conditions, as described earlier.

144

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Environmental Condition
Each Environmental Condition defines exactly where the enchantment in an item will
be effective.
For example: ‘Only in France confines the power of the enchantment to within the boundaries
of the land of France; the enchantment will not work beyond. Or; ‘Only underground’
means that the enchantment works beneath the surface of the earth, but not above it.
Environmental conditions must be specific but can be as esoteric as the sorcerer
wishes: ‘Work only on Wednesdays’ means precisely that.

Target Condition
Each Target Condition defines exactly who will or will not be affected by the enchantments
in an item. For example, ‘Trolls only’ means that spells in an enchantment work only
against trolls; other creatures will not be affected.

User Condition
If an enchantment has no User Condition assigned to it, anyone can use it. Each User
Condition defines exactly who can or cannot use the enchantments in an item. For
example: ‘Only by me’ means that only the sorcerer creating the enchantment can
make use of it. ‘Only Alaric’ means that only Alaric can make use of the enchantment.
The user concerned must be present at the Enchanting Ritual although he does not
need to take part in it.

Skill Condition
This condition prevents an enchanted item from being used unless the user has a
specific skill and a specific percentage within it. For example, ‘Athletics 60%’ means
that, although Athletics is a Common Skill, only those with 60% or higher can make
use of it. Basing the condition on an Advanced Skill reinforces it still further. The skill
condition can also be applied to magical skills, too.

Power Crystals
Power crystals can be readily applied to any fantasy setting that may have naturally
occurring stores of magical energy. Crystals need not be the medium; rocks, liquids,
talismans, relics and so forth can all be used.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

145

Types of Crystal

Crystals tend to be found in one of four types: Magic Point Store (Empty), Magic Point
Store (Charged) and Spell Matrix.

Random Crystal Type
1D100
01–10
11–55
55–80
81–00

Power Crystal Type
Magic Point Store (Charged)
Magic Point Store (Empty)
Spell Matrix
Dud crystal (resembles a power crystal and
may even be detected as one, but is a dud)

Magic Point Store (Empty)
The crystal has no Magic Points stored in it but is ready, once attuned, to accept Magic
Points and store them for further use. The larger the crystal, the more Magic Points it
can store.
The crystals Adventurers are most likely to find (although they are, again, rarities), can
hold 3D6+2 Magic Points. The storage capacity generally indicates the relative size of
the crystal. A crystal capable of storing 5 Magic Points is the size of a thumbnail; every
5 points doubles this size.

Magic Point Store (Charged)
Precisely as above but the crystal already holds some Magic Points – either residual
energy from the god who lost the blood, or Magic Points charged into the crystal by
someone else before the crystal was lost or discarded (a very rare occurrence!). Like an
empty crystal, a Charged crystal can store up to 3D6+2 Magic Points but comes ready
charged with 2D6 Magic Points.

Spell Matrix
Instead of holding Magic Points, the crystal acts as a matrix for a Common Magic spell,
determined randomly or chosen by the Games Master. Common Magic is still used to
activate the spell, but it means that the user does not need to invest time and energy
in learning the spell and the spell’s Magnitude may be of a higher Magnitude than the
Adventurer could ordinarily learn and cast owing to INT limits.
To randomly determine what Common Magic spell a crystal contains, roll on the
Random Spell Matrix table on page 151. To determine its Magnitude, roll on the
Random Magnitude table below. Magnitude only needs be determined for spells with
the progressive trait (marked in italics in the Random Spell Matrix table).

146

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Whoever uses a Spell Matrix crystal must still spend Magic Points to activate the spell it
contains. Also, only a Detect Magic or other divination can confirm what spell matrix
the crystal holds – unless the crystal is actively used. If using a Detect Magic spell to
identify a spell matrix and a critical Common Magic success occurs, then the nature of
the spell matrix and its Magnitude are revealed.

Random Magnitude table
1D100
01
02–05
06–15
16–25
26–55
56–00

Magnitude
1D6+6
1D6+5
1D6+4
1D6+3
1D6+2
1D6+1

Attuning and Using a Power Crystal

Before the Magic Points or spell can be used the crystal must be attuned; that is, the
user establishes the right psychic/magical bond with the crystal to utilise its power.
To do this requires two rolls. The first is either a Difficult (–20%) Insight or a Routine
Meditation Test, which puts the user into the right mental frame. If this skill roll is
successful, then the next stage of attuning can take place. If the roll is a critical success
the user gains a +10% bonus to the next roll. If he fails or fumbles, attuning can go
no further.
The second roll is a Difficult (–20%) Persistence roll as the user attempts to create an
irrevocable harness to the crystal’s power. If successful, he can then use the crystal’s properties
– be that draw Magic Points, charge the crystal with them, use the spell it contains or access
the myth. If the Persistence roll fails, he cannot attempt to attune the crystal again; if he
fumbles, the residual power of the crystal causes psychic backlash and he suffers a loss of 1
Magic Point permanently.
A Magic Point Store crystal can be charged with Magic Points by the attuned user, up
to its maximum capacity. To do this he spends one hour in concentration, holding the
crystal, transferring the points. Stored points remain until used; the user regains the
Magic Points he has stored in the crystal at the normal rate.
To use the crystal he must have it on his person. He does not need to hold the crystal
in his hand, but there needs to be a physical connection between him and the crystal.
Thus a crystal can be worn in a ring, worked into a sword hilt, stitched into clothing
in the form jewellery and so forth. If the two are separated – even by a few millimetres
– then the powers of the crystal are unavailable to him until contact is re-established.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

147

Magic Points that are used in creating enchantments do not have any effect on a
sorcerer’s own Magic Points and he does not need to tie any of his magical reserves
into an enchantment – hence the attraction of power crystals to sorcerers. However, if
the enchanted item is broken, releasing the Magic Points, those points dissipate to the
aether: the sorcerer is unable to gain any benefit from them.

The Value of Power Crystals

Power crystals are rare and treasured artefacts: they are closely and jealously guarded and
are very, very unlikely to find their way onto an open market. Sorcerers prize Magic Point
Store crystals for the enormous advantage they afford in working enchantments.
Spell Matrix crystals are the least valuable of the different types although, given the
possibility of huge magnitude of the contained spell, they can still command vast sums
of money.
Power crystals are therefore not given any kind of price because, to many, they are
priceless. However even the lowliest crystal is likely to command a starting price of
1,000 Silver and more powerful specimens many, many times more.
The ring is made of silver and is fashioned after a bear’s claw. It contains a Magnitude
6 Beast Form (Bear) Common Magic Spell matrix. It has been lost to the cult of Bear
Father for thousands of years and now the High Priest of the cult seeks its return from
the lands inhabited by Weasel Brother. No one knows what Weasel Brother did with
the ring after wooing the Polar Maiden, but it is rumoured he encased the ring in ice
and hid it far beneath the ground so that the angry Bear Father would never find it
again.

148

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Random Spell Matrix table
1D100
01–02
03–04
05–06
07–08
09–10
11–12
13–14
15–16
17
18
19
20–21
22–23
24–25
26–27
28
29–30
31–32
33–34
35
36–37
38
39
40
41–42
43–44
45–46
47
48–49
50

Spell Matrix
Abacus
Armoursmith’s Boon
Babel
Bandit’s Cloak
Bearing Witness
Beast Call
Bestial Enhancement
Becalm
Befuddle
Bladesharp
Bludgeon
Boon of Lasting Night
Cauterise
Chill
Clear Path
Co-ordination
Countermagic
Countermagic Shield
Darkwall
Demoralise
Detect X
Disruption
Dragon’s Breath
Dullblade
Endurance
Entertainer’s Smile
Extinguish
Fanaticism
Fate
Firearrow

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

1D100
51
52
53–54
55–56
57–58
59–60
61–62
63–64
65–66
67–68
69–70
71
72
73–74
75–76
77–78
79–80
81–82
83–84
85
86–87
88
89
90–91
92
93–94
95–96
97–98
99–00

Spell Matrix
Fireblade
Frostbite
Glamour
Golden Tongue
Hand of Death
Heal
Ignite
Light
Lucky
Mason’s Boon
Mindspeech
Mobility
Multimissile
Parry
Pierce
Protection
Push/Pull
Repair
Second Sight
Skybolt
Slow
Speedart
Spirit Bane
Strength
Thunder’s Voice
Understanding
Vigour
Warmth
Water Breath

149

ALCHEMY
The traditional view of the alchemist is of the bearded, robed and capped scholar,
surrounded by his apparatus, striving to turn base metals into gold. This image belies
the truth of alchemy; for its is an ancient art practised by the Chinese, Egyptians, and
Sumerians more than a 1,000 years before the detailed writings and experiments of
the likes of Basil Valentine, John Dee and even Sir Isaac Newton. The transformation
of base materials into gold is a simplistic metaphor for an art that is a subtle alliance
of chemistry, mysticism and spirituality and which seeks, no less, for the secret of
eternal life. The chemical experiments of alchemical practitioners have little to do with
attaining material wealth, although it is no doubt an attractive side-effect, and more to
do with understanding how to attain spiritual purity and consequently metaphysical
transformation through achieving the same with the use of the Elements and the
Metals.
Alchemy is included here, in Arms of Legend, because the alchemical process relies on
specific equipment and a scientific methodology far more than other forms of magic.
Hence, the availability of equipment, which is described later in this chapter, is a
practical necessity.

Alchemy, Magic and Science
Alchemy occupies a curious place in relation to both magic and science. It blends
both, but belongs to neither. In a magic-rich world, where gods regularly grant divine
gifts, and magical power, there are easier ways to achieve the purity and transformation
sought by alchemists. In worlds where science dominate, alchemy’s importance is
diminished for the simple reason that mysticism and spirituality has little place in the
hard, logical world of empirical science, although alchemy clearly laid the foundations
for the scientific endeavour, particularly during the European Renaissance.
Alchemy offers something magic and science cannot. In the case of magic, alchemy
offers permanence. Magic is a temporary application of power, short-lived and reliant
on inherently magical paradigms such as Gods. Alchemy seeks to attain similar powers
through defining the essence of things and then manipulating that essence to create
something new that transcends mundane capability. In the case of science alchemy offers
a mystical and spiritual approach that is about understanding the nature of the soul and
its relationship with the earth and cosmos to achieve a higher state of being. Curiously,
it is not about attaining godhood; instead alchemy is concerned with attaining human
perfection, through purity of mind and spirit, and thereby transcending the ravages of
disease and time to attain enlightenment.

150

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Lore (Alchemy) (INT x2)
Like all Lore skills, Alchemy is based on the INT Characteristic. It is the Adventurer’s
ability to study, perceive and understand the essential qualities and properties of the
physical world and how they relate to the spiritual world. Alchemists study both
practical chemistry but also metaphysics and philosophy.
The Alchemy skill is used whenever an alchemical experiment is being conducted
to determine the degree of success and the experiment’s result. It also measures the
alchemist’s own progress towards purity of body, mind and spirit. The value of the
Alchemy skill indicates what results the alchemist is capable of achieving with his degree
of knowledge, as outlined in the Philosopher’s Stone, overleaf. However if can also be
used in tests requiring expertise with mystical, spiritual or philosophical concepts, since
all alchemists are widely read in both practical and metaphysical disciplines.

Alchemists concern themselves with four core endeavours: Understanding (the physical
and metaphysical worlds), Manipulation (of the same), Transmutation (of the physical
into the metaphysical, and vice versa) and Purity. They do this through the study of
the Elements and the Seven Metals. Alchemists have determined that metals can be
subdivided into seven lesser forms which relate to the Prime Metals which are: Copper,
Gold, Iron, Lead, Mercury, Silver and Tin. Gold is the purest metal, symbolising physical
and spiritual purity and perfection. By transmuting the six lesser metals into gold, the
alchemist hopes to unlock the secret of achieving similar, personal purity and perfection.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

The mechanism for this understanding, and the thing pursued by all alchemist
Adventurers, is the Philosopher’s Stone. The Alchemist must also invest the
Philosopher’s Stone with Magic Points; this determines its effects, as described. The
Magic Point investment is actually an unconscious act for the alchemist, occurring as
part of the metaphysical application of the Alchemy skill. As many Magic Points can be
invested as the Alchemist desires, depending on personal reserves. However, it requires
one gram of Philosopher’s Stone to store at least one magic point.

The Philosopher’s Stone
Also known as the Essence, the Quintessence, the Magisterium and the Magnum
Opus, the Philosopher’s Stone is so-named not because it is a physical stone, but
because it can resist the effects of fire in the same way a physical stone resists them.
When created, the Philosopher’s Stone takes the form of a fine, fragrant, sweet-tasting
powder that has the brilliance of the most perfect glass and may be of any colour. The
Philosopher’s Stone is the agent used in affecting transmutation and attaining purity.
The Philosopher’s Stone has its own degree of purity, based on the alchemist’s skill. It
is an amalgamation of three components: mercury, ‘salt’(not sodium chloride, but a
compound from dissolving one of the base metals in strong acid and then distilling the
residue) and sulphur. Mercury is the primal element that makes all things malleable
and tramsutable; sulphur provides flammability, or the catalyst for transformation; and
salt binds the two together, bringing about the Philosopher’s Stone.

Making the Philosopher’s Stone

Making the Philosopher’s Stone requires one kilogram of each component to create
one gram of Philosopher’s Stone. The alchemist requires access to a laboratory and an
array of alchemical equipment which must include a furnace, mortars for grinding,
alembics and a variety of other paraphernalia detailed further on in this section. It
takes one week to prepare one gram of the Stone. An Alchemy test is then made and,
if successful, the Philosopher’s Stone is crystallised. A critical success yields double the
amount.
The Alchemist must also invest the Philosopher’s Stone with Magic Points; this
determines its purity, as described. The Magic Point investment is actually an
unconscious act for the alchemist, occurring as part of the metaphysical application
of the Alchemy skill. As many Magic Points can be invested as the Alchemist desires,
depending on personal reserves. However, it requires one gram of Philosopher’s Stone
to store one Magic Point.

Properties of the Philosopher’s Stone

Once crystallised the Philosopher’s Stone has properties based on its Purity. Its Purity
is determined by the skill of the alchemist.

152

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Philosopher’s Stone Purity
Alchemist’s Lore
(Alchemy) Skill
Value
Purity
01–50%
1

51–100%

2

101–150%

3

151–250%

4

251%+

5

Purity
Property
Healing

Effect
For every Magic Point invested in
the creation of the Stone, 1 Hit
Point of damage in each location is
healed immediately. The Stone can be
sprinkled on, or rubbed into, a wound
to provide healing, or can drunk in the
form of a solution.
Disease
For every 3 Magic Points invested, the
Resistance
imbiber gains +5% to their Resilience
skill for the purposes of resisting disease.
This effect is permanent, and any
existing disease is immediately cured.
Poison
For every 3 Magic Points invested, the
Resistance
imbiber gains +5% to their Resilience
skill for the purposes of resisting poison.
This effect is permanent, and any
existing poison is immediately cured.
Longevity
For every 3 Magic Points invested the
imbiber gains an additional 5 years
to their normal lifespan. They are
not immortal and not immune to the
physical damage, but the ageing process
slows as their allotted span increases.
Immortality For the Philosopher’s Stone to grant
immortality, the alchemist must be able
to invest at least 250 Magic Points.
Where reserves are found and how they
are stored is a problem for the alchemist
to solve. Once imbibed, the Adventurer
is immortal with ageing arrested. The
Adventurer is still susceptible to all
forms of damage, but immune to the
passage of time.

The Purity Property column determines what the Philosopher’s Stone, when ingested,
can achieve. All effects are stackable, meaning that, for example, a Purity 3 Philosopher’s
Stone would heal damage and both cure disease and poison effects as well as increasing
the imbiber’s Resilience.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

153

Transmutation

The Philosopher’s Stone is used as the agent to turn base metal into gold. The number
of Magic Points invested in the Philosopher’s Stone, multiplied by its Purity, is the
amount of grams of base metal the alchemist can turn into half that weight in gold.
Thus an alchemist who has created 6 grams of Purity 3 Philosopher’s Stone, invested
with 6 Magic Points, can transmute 18 grams of copper or tin, say, into 9 grams of pure
gold. The transmutation process takes one week per gram of base metal and requires
a successful Alchemy each week test to accomplish. Failing a test means the process
must be repeated from scratch. The alchemist needs to be in attendance for at least
12 hours of each day to ensure the transmutation is going according to plan, although
apprentices and associates can take over to allow the alchemist to rest.
Naturally enough the alchemist must have access to the raw components as well as
a fully stocked and functioning laboratory. He cannot conduct any other alchemical
processes or studies whilst transmuting base metal to gold; his full attention must be
given to the task. If the Alchemy test is a critical success, then the amount of gold
created at the end of the process is one gram higher than expected. If the Alchemy roll
is fumbled, then roll on the Transmutation Backlash table.

Transmutation Backlash Table
1D20
01–05
07–10
11–14
15–16

17–18
19
20

Effect
Equipment overheats and experiment must be aborted.
Experiment fails with raw material rendered to a useless slag.
Equipment overheats and explodes. All alchemical apparatus is
destroyed.
Equipment overheats and explodes. All alchemical apparatus is
destroyed and alchemist plus any companions sustain 1D6 damage
from flying glass and earthenware.
As above, but the explosion is of ferocious intensity. Alchemist plus any
companions sustain 2D6 damage.
Conflagration. A Large Fire consumes the entire laboratory. All
occupants suffer 3D6 damage. All equipment destroyed.
Explosion. The entire laboratory explodes with Inferno intensity. 5D6
damage to all occupants, plus a raging fire that damages all buildings
within 60 metres of the laboratory’s location.

Poisons

Alchemists can manufacture poisons and their antidotes. The completed poison’s
Potency is up to, or equal to, the alchemist’s Alchemy skill, and the characteristics of
the poison (Conditions, Onset Time and Duration) is determined by his skill rating.
It takes one week to make one dose of poison and the alchemist requires appropriate
materials and apparatus to formulate it. The alchemist determines what skill (Persistence
or Resilience) is used to resist the poison’s effects.

154

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Alchemy Poisons Table
Alchemy Skill
01–20
21–40
41–60
61–80
81–100+

Conditions
1
2
3
4
5

Onset Time
Immediate
1D3 Minutes
1D3 Hours
1D3 Days
1D3 Weeks

Duration
Instant
1D3 Minutes
1D3 Hours
1D3 Days
1D3 Weeks

Conditions: The maximum number of Conditions (see Legend, page 79) the alchemist
can imbue into the poison.
Onset Time: The amount of time required before the poison takes effect, requiring a
Resistance roll.
Duration: The time period over which the poison affects the body. The frequency
of Resistance tests are determined by the alchemist but must follow the Duration
increment. For example, a poison with a Duration of 1D3 weeks requires Resistance
rolls to be made weekly; they cannot be given a frequency of hours or days.
An alchemist can manufacture a poison with a combination of lesser Conditions,
Onset Time and Duration as determined by his skill. An alchemist with a skill of 60%
could, for example, concoct a poison with two Conditions, with a 1D3 Hour Onset
Time and a 1D3 Minute Duration. He could not, however, concoct a two Condition
poison with a 1D3 Day Onset Time.
Naturally enough, an alchemist can also formulate the antidote to any poison he
has created. All antidotes can be ingested in advance to prevent against the poison’s
effects, or be taken afterwards to treat the symptoms (assuming there is enough time).
Antidotes always arrest the damage; they do not cure it.
Naturally enough, an alchemist can also formulate the antidote to any poison he has
created. All antidotes, with the exception of Class 1 poisons, can be ingested in advance
to prevent against the poison’s effects, or be taken afterwards to treat the symptoms
(assuming there is enough time). Antidotes always arrest the damage; they do not cure it.

The Alchemist’s Laboratory
Laboratories come in all shapes and sizes and may be hidden or in open view, depending
on the secrecy of the alchemist. Common to all laboratories, though, is the range and
variety of equipment to be found there. This section describes the essential components
of an alchemist’s laboratory.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

155

The Laboratory

An alchemist requires a workspace. Somewhere large enough to accommodate
a workbench a couple of metres in length, a metre in width and sturdy enough to
support all the alchemical apparatus required for experiments. The laboratory also
need sufficient room for storage of raw materials and equipment spares. Thus, most
alchemists own or rent suitable premises or rooms within such premises, where they
will not be disturbed and the sight, sound and smell of their experiments will not
attract undue alarm or attention.

Heat Source

This is essential, and it must be both contained and easy to regulate, allowing a rapid
increase or decrease of heat promote or arrest processes such as distillation. The simplest
heat source is an open fire, but this is difficult to regulate. Therefore it is common for
most alchemists to invest in an athanor. This is a clay furnace about one and a half
metres in height. It can be split into several sections and the base section contains a
small fireplace for the heat source. Each section can be fitted with a grid or stand for
various receptacles, and the even heat distribution around the athanor allows constant
temperatures to be maintained.
Most powerful furnaces, either of a beehived or ziggurat design, are used for smelting,
rapid distillation, sublimation and digestion, according to the alchemist’s needs. Large
furnaces are charcoal, coal or wood fired and give out huge amounts of heat and
sometimes noxious gases. Thus they need to be in large, well ventilated areas and kept
under strict watch whilst in operation.

Vessels

Alchemists use a vast array of different vessels, made from glass, clay and earthenware,
for their experiments. Vessels come in all shapes and sizes. It is a tendency for alchemists
to buy the largest vessels they can, even though the materials they create might be very,
very small. The bigger and more impressive the assembly of vessels; the more impressive
and important the laboratory appears. Space prevents a full listing, but the key vessels
to be found in a typical laboratory are:

Alembics
A glass or earthenware vessel in two parts. The lower part is a bulbous flask in which
ingredients are placed for heating. The upper part is a domed vessel that can be separated
from the lower. It has a stem leading from its base that points downwards at an angle
allowing for condensing fluids to drain into a collecting vessel, such as a receiver.

Cucurbits
A wide-necked, bulbous jar used for boiling. Several cucurbits can be stacked together,
with the upper jars having hollow bottoms to allow vapours to pass upwards and
condense against the sides of the vessel.

156

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Retorts
Another bulbous jar with a long, swan-like neck that curves over the side of the bowl in
a gentle bend. Used for distillation and in conjunction with matrasses and recipients.

Matrasses
A matrass is a spherical bowl with a long, angled, stem-like neck that rises some way
above the bowl. Used to collect distillate, vapours and condensing liquids in conjunction
with retorts and other vessels.

Pelican
Similar to an alembic but with two stems leading from the upper bowl allowing
different distillates to be collected separately.

Recipient
A large bulb with a short, wide-mouthed, angled stem, and used to collect distillates
and vapours from retorts and other vessels.
The cost of these alchemical apparatus items is given in the Alchemical Tools table,
below. They are generally available in Medium Cities and larger.

Alchemical Tools
Apparatus
Alembics
Cucurbits
Retorts
Matrasses
Pelican
Recipient

Price (SP)
100
150
200
200
225
150

Attempting any alchemical operation without one of the above being present imposes
a –15% penalty on the Lore (Alchemy) skill.
If, when conducting any experiment, the Lore (Alchemy) roll is fumbled, 1D6 pieces of
equipment are damaged or destroyed as a result of the experiment having gone wrong.
Roll 1D6 to determine which pieces have been damaged, re-rolling any duplicate
results:

Random Apparatus
1D6
1
2
3
4
5
6
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Apparatus
Alembics
Cucurbits
Retorts
Matrasses
Pelican
Recipient

157

Sustaining the Life of an Alchemist

Alchemists require access to raw materials, most notably base metals and various other
chemicals for the creation of the salts necessary to crystallise the Philosopher’s Stone
such as sulphur. This requires money and good connections, particularly with the
trading guilds of a city. Many alchemists thus work under the patronage of someone
wealthy enough to finance their activities but who may have motives less pure than
those the alchemist. This might be a wealthy noble or noble family but equally it might
be a cult or guild and, in these circumstances, the needs of the patron tend to come
before the higher motives of the alchemist himself.
Whilst it is in the power of a Legend alchemist Adventurer to make gold to pay for their
own activities, the quantities they can make are relatively small and the core resources
considerable. It is therefore common for alchemists to spend their time labouring on
smaller, less edifying projects for their patron and in creating small doses of potions
and balms for others.
Alchemists tend to be self-absorbed, studious individuals concerned less with making gold
and magic potions and more with achieving knowledge and refining particular alchemical
processes aimed at improving the quality of the elusive Philosopher’s Stone. They are not
adventuring types and are more likely to hire Adventurers (as bodyguards, or agents to
procure certain minerals) than to do the adventuring. There are also many alchemists who
are charlatans; those who lack the true skill and dedication to perform alchemy but claim
they have the talent in order to secure prestige and personal wealth without having to work
for it. True alchemists are unconcerned by the lure of wealth. Creating gold from base
metals is merely an expression of their skill. The true goal is immortality and purity, and this
requires decades of study and experimentation to achieve.
For all these reasons alchemists are recommended as Non-Player Characters rather than
as Adventurers. More to the point, their alchemical abilities need to be carefully assessed
in the overall scheme of a campaign. If alchemy is a successful enterprise then eternal life
or longevity will be commonplace. Transmuting base metal into gold in vast quantities
will devalue gold as a currency. Charlatans will find shortcuts that create false gold, thus
debasing the reputation of true alchemists, and many hedge magicians and peddlers of
cheap remedies will make the quality of true magical potions suspect.

158

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Legend & Open Content
Here at Mongoose Publishing, we want what we truly believe to be one of the best
fantasy RPGs on the market to be easy to use and modify. We have therefore made
this rulebook Open Content, in conjunction with the Open Game Licence.
All the text of this book is designated as Open Content – this means you are free to
use the Open Game Licence (overleaf ) to reproduce this text and build upon it with
your own scenarios and mechanics. You can even print and sell such work, if that is
your desire (and we would wish you the very best of luck if you choose to do this!).
By using the Open Content of this book, you also have permission to download the
Legend Compatible logo from our web site (on the Legend product pages), and use
that on any Legend work you publish, to demonstrate your material is part of the
wider Legend family.
Please note that the artwork in this book is not Open Content.
All books in the core Legend range (those whose titles have the word ‘Legend’ in
them) will also be designated as Open Content, allowing you to expand your own
games in many different directions, while maintaining a solid root that everyone will
be familiar with.
For example, you might be using Legend to produce your own gaming world. If
you wanted to add some high seas action, you can simply and quickly bring over the
Open Content rules we produce in, say, Pirates of Legend, knowing that everyone
who plays Legend will at least be familiar with those rules.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

OPEN GAME LICENSE Version 1.0a
The following text is the property of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. and is Copyright 2000 Wizards of the Coast, Inc
(‘Wizards’). All Rights Reserved.
1. Definitions: (a)’Contributors’ means the copyright and/or trademark owners who have contributed Open Game
Content; (b)’Derivative Material’ means copyrighted material including derivative works and translations (including
into other computer languages), potation, modification, correction, addition, extension, upgrade, improvement, compilation, abridgment or other form in which an existing work may be recast, transformed or adapted; (c) ‘Distribute’
means to reproduce, license, rent, lease, sell, broadcast, publicly display, transmit or otherwise distribute; (d)’Open
Game Content’ means the game mechanic and includes the methods, procedures, processes and routines to the extent
such content does not embody the Product Identity and is an enhancement over the prior art and any additional
content clearly identified as Open Game Content by the Contributor, and means any work covered by this License,
including translations and derivative works under copyright law, but specifically excludes Product Identity. (e) ‘Product
Identity’ means product and product line names, logos and identifying marks including trade dress; artifacts; creatures
characters; stories, storylines, plots, thematic elements, dialogue, incidents, language, artwork, symbols, designs, depictions, likenesses, formats, poses, concepts, themes and graphic, photographic and other visual or audio representations;
names and descriptions of characters, spells, enchantments, personalities, teams, personas, likenesses and special abilities; places, locations, environments, creatures, equipment, magical or supernatural abilities or effects, logos, symbols,
or graphic designs; and any other trademark or registered trademark clearly identified as Product identity by the owner
of the Product Identity, and which specifically excludes the Open Game Content; (f ) ‘Trademark’ means the logos,
names, mark, sign, motto, designs that are used by a Contributor to identify itself or its products or the associated
products contributed to the Open Game License by the Contributor (g) ‘Use’, ‘Used’ or ‘Using’ means to use, Distribute, copy, edit, format, modify, translate and otherwise create Derivative Material of Open Game Content. (h) ‘You’ or
‘Your’ means the licensee in terms of this agreement.
2. The License: This License applies to any Open Game Content that contains a notice indicating that the Open Game
Content may only be Used under and in terms of this License. You must affix such a notice to any Open Game Content that you Use. No terms may be added to or subtracted from this License except as described by the License itself.
No other terms or conditions may be applied to any Open Game Content distributed using this License.
3. Offer and Acceptance: By Using the Open Game Content You indicate Your acceptance of the terms of this License.
4. Grant and Consideration: In consideration for agreeing to use this License, the Contributors grant You a perpetual,
worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive license with the exact terms of this License to Use, the Open Game Content.
5. Representation of Authority to Contribute: If You are contributing original material as Open Game Content, You
represent that Your Contributions are Your original creation and/or You have sufficient rights to grant the rights conveyed by this License.
6. Notice of License Copyright: You must update the COPYRIGHT NOTICE portion of this License to include the
exact text of the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any Open Game Content You are copying, modifying or distributing,
and You must add the title, the copyright date, and the copyright holder’s name to the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any
original Open Game Content you Distribute.
7. Use of Product Identity: You agree not to Use any Product Identity, including as an indication as to compatibility, except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of each element of that Product Identity.
You agree not to indicate compatibility or co-adaptability with any Trademark or Registered Trademark in conjunction
with a work containing Open Game Content except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with
the owner of such Trademark or Registered Trademark. The use of any Product Identity in Open Game Content does
not constitute a challenge to the ownership of that Product Identity. The owner of any Product Identity used in Open
Game Content shall retain all rights, title and interest in and to that Product Identity.
8. Identification: If you distribute Open Game Content You must clearly indicate which portions of the work that you
are distributing are Open Game Content.
9. Updating the License: Wizards or its designated Agents may publish updated versions of this License. You may use
any authorised version of this License to copy, modify and distribute any Open Game Content originally distributed
under any version of this License.
10. Copy of this License: You MUST include a copy of this License with every copy of the Open Game Content You
Distribute.
11. Use of Contributor Credits: You may not market or advertise the Open Game Content using the name of any
Contributor unless You have written permission from the Contributor to do so.
12. Inability to Comply: If it is impossible for You to comply with any of the terms of this License with respect to some
or all of the Open Game Content due to statute, judicial order, or governmental regulation then You may not Use any
Open Game Material so affected.
13. Termination: This License will terminate automatically if You fail to comply with all terms herein and fail to cure
such breach within 30 days of becoming aware of the breach. All sublicenses shall survive the termination of this
License.
14. Reformation: If any provision of this License is held to be unenforceable, such provision shall be reformed only to
the extent necessary to make it enforceable.
15. COPYRIGHT NOTICE
Open Game License v 1.0a Copyright 2000, Wizards of the Coast, Inc.
Legend Core Rulebook, Copyright 2011, Mongoose Publishing Ltd
Arms of Legend, Copyright 2012, Mongoose Publishing Ltd
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

arms of

legend

arms of

legend
ARMS OF LEGEND
An adventurer is only as good as his equipment, so the saying goes – and with
this mighty tome, your adventurer will be the best-equipped he can be. From
new weapons and armour, to the more mundane items that keep an adventure
going, Arms of Legend is a complete catalogue that will keep players coming
back for more after every adventure.

MGP 8304

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

US$19.99

