Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

samurai of
LEGEND

Credits  

Original Author
Lawrence Whitaker

Developer
Darren Pierce

Editor
Matthew Sprange

Layout 
Will Chapman

Interior Illustrations
Jesse Mohn, Leonardo Borazio, Nick 
Egberts, Marco Morte, Nathan Furman 
and Phil Renne

Special Thanks
Nicky Wong

Contents

Introduction 

Japan and the Heian Era 

Life in Japan 

Characters 

Equipment of the Samurai 

Religion and Faith 

Magic of Japan 

Ways of the Warriors 

Creatures of Japan 

Ki for the Sensei 

Glossary 

2

4

24

37

66

76

90

103

113

140

145

Samurai of Legend  ©2012 Mongoose Publishing. All rights reserved. Reproduction of non-Open Game Content 

of this work by any means without the written permission of the publisher is expressly forbidden. Legend is 

Copyright Information

presented under the Open Game Licence. See page 152 for the text of this licence. All text paragraphs and tables 
containing game mechanics and statistics derivative of Open Game Content and the System Reference Document 
are considered to be Open Game Content.  All other signiﬁcant characters, names, places, items, art and text herein 

are copyrighted by Mongoose Publishing.  All rights reserved.  Printed in USA

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

introduction

Ancient Japan has held a long fascination for the west. The formality of the society, steeped in notions 
of honour and debt almost unheard of in the west; the traditions of the samurai and their code of 
bushido; the enigmatic ninja and the duality of the Shinto and Buddhist religious philosophies – each 
contributes to a unique society that is ideal for adventure on many different levels.

What Period is the Setting?

The most famous feudal period is that of Sengoku (‘warring states’). The setting for Samurai of 
Legend is based on the earlier, Heian period (794 – 1192). It was in this era that the samurai 
began their ascent to power as a socio-military force and it encompasses a burgeoning period 
for the arts, religion and culture. Whilst the Emperor rules supreme, true power is held by the 
Fujiwara nobility, which exercised regency throughout the period.

The Heian (pronounced HEE-yun) period predates the Sengoku period archetypes. Ninja, that 
staple of popular Japanese and now western, culture, did not come into existence until much 
later. The  warrior  tradition  of  the  bushi  was  in  its  formative  years  and  the  shogunates  –  the 
military dictatorship that controlled medieval Japan – came into being at the end of the Heian 
period. However, as this is intended as a mythic interpretation of the Heian era, guidance is given 
on including anachronisms such as the ninja. 

There are several reasons for focusing on the Heian period. First, most, if not all, the most crucial 
elements of the feudal period were developed during this time. It is therefore an opportunity to 
explore the rise of the samurai, the establishment of the shogunate and the decline of imperial 
Japan. Second, power was consolidated into the hands of one or two clans, each with different 
agendas and this provides a perfect backdrop for a diverse range of character types without the 
dominance of the samurai that transpired in later eras. Thirdly, certain key precepts of Japanese 
Buddhism were developed in this period, leading to a radical progression of belief and philosophy 
but  also  to schisms within  the religious infrastructure. In the latter  half of the Heian  period 
the  temples  and  monasteries  took  on  a  pseudo-militaristic  approach,  partly  out  of  necessity, 
partly in response to the power base in the Imperial court and this offers a perfect backdrop for 
Japanese mystics and magicians. Fourthly, women occupied a unique place in Japanese society 
that was thoroughly diminished in the feudal era. Women were power-brokers, artists, thinkers 
and  shapers  of  the  cultural  changes  that  marked  the  Heian  period  from  its  predecessors  and 
successors. Finally, this is an era of Japan largely unexplored in roleplaying games, which have 
concentrated on the feudal period. This is fertile ground and Legend wishes to tread it. We know 
you, the Games Masters and players, will thoroughly enjoy it.

2
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

What Do I Need to Know?

This book assumes the reader is new to historical Japan, although those with knowledge of it through 
popular mediums and historical research should not ﬁnd it wanting. Within these pages you will ﬁnd 
everything needed to create an authentic sense of mythic Japan using the Legend rules system.

What Other Books Do I Need?

Aside from this book, you will need the Legend Core Rulebook. Other books that will prove useful 
but are not essential, are Monsters of Legend and Arms of Legend.

What is in this Book?
Japan and the Heian Era
This chapter gives a full overview of the setting for Samurai of Legend, with information about 
the islands, its provinces, and people. This chapter also provides an extensive timeline for the 
Heian era, noting key personalities and events; historical and mythical.

Life in Japan
The social, personal and political customs of Heian Japan are explored and explained, including 
the Japanese calendar and time notation.

Character Creation
Full guidelines on creating a character for Samurai of Legend with new professions, skills, a clan/
family table and the introduction of the On system, used for measuring personal and family honour.

Equipment of the Samurai
An overview of traditional Japanese equipment, including new weapons.

Religion and Faith
Detailing the Buddhist and Shinto faiths, with descriptions of the key beliefs and major deities.

Magic of Japan
Full guidance on how the various magic systems of Legend should be treated, along with new 
spells and Kai abilities.

Way of the Warriors
An overview of the martial classes of Japan: the samurai, the sohei and as an optional inclusion, 
the ninja.

Creatures of Japan
The monsters of Japanese myth and legend.

Ki for the Sensei
Campaign advice for the Games Master and an introductory scenario, Beneath an Opal Moon, 
and a full Glossary of words and terms used throughout this book.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

3

japan and the heian era

This chapter fulﬁls two objectives; to describe Japan the place and to give an overview of the 
Heian period, which will be explored in greater detail in the chapters to come. Most people 
are familiar with some aspects of Japan; that it is a collection of islands; that it embodies strict 
social codes; that it has a long, highly evolved culture and that it has experienced great localised 
turbulence (wars and natural disasters) throughout its long history. However, there is much more 
to understand and learn and so in this chapter we present the facts about this fascinating country, 
from the perspective of the 9th and 10th Centuries.

However, Legend is also a fantasy game and whilst this book strives for historical accuracy, woven 
into the factual material is a certain degree of myth and legend. There are also some deliberate 
anachronisms. Ninja, for example, do not strictly appear until the later, feudal era but they are 
eluded to here and offered as a character option in the Chapter beginning on page 37. Whilst 
this subverts the veracity, ninja and the like have become such staples of the west’s perception of 
ancient Japan and are such an enticing concept for adventuring, that we feel a case can be made 
for deliberately skewing history to include them in this, a fantasy Legend setting. Thus, the Japan 
described throughout this book should be viewed as a mythical, alternate Japan and the Heian 
era a mythical, alternate version of that period. The mythical and anachronistic elements are 
clearly presented and so, if an authentic historical recreation is preferred by players and Games 
Masters, they can be omitted easily enough.

Shinto Creation Myth

First came the primal chaos, which endured for aeons. Then, ﬁnally, the Plain of High Heaven 
arose from the chaos and with it was created the Ame-no-Minaka-Nushi-no-Mikoto, the August 
Centre of Heaven and then came Takami-Musubi-no-Mikoto, the August Producing Wondrous 
deity and shortly afterwards, a third, who was Kammi-Musubi-no-Mikoto, the Divine Producing 
Wondrous deity. Together these three were known as the Creating Deities and they dwelt in 
Heaven and watched other formations from the primal chaos.

From the void something heavy and opaque took shape; a complete contrast to the light and 
insubstantial  Plain  of  High  Heaven  and  this  was  the  earth,  which  was  like  an  oyster  pearl, 
coalescing  within  the  shell  of  the  void.  On  this  heavy,  ungainly  place,  two  further  deities 
appeared. These were Umashi-Ashi-Kahibi-Hikoji-no-Mikoto (the Pleasant Reed-Shoot Prince-
Elder  Deity)  and  Ame-no-Tokotachi-no-Mikoto  (The  Heavenly  Eternally-Standing  Deity). 
They looked about the world and saw it was incomplete and adrift in the void but did nothing 
at that particular point. So it was that, after these ﬁve deities came into existence, so did many 
more;  however,  surrounded  by  the  chaos,  there  was  little  for  them  to  do  except  observe  and 
so that is precisely what they did. Eventually though, Izanagi and Izanami, two of the deities 
of Heaven, were told to descend to the nebulous earth and make it substantial. This they did 
together, by pushing the point of the spear, Ama-no-Nuboko, into the murkiness surrounding 
the pearl. As Izanagi drew-up the spear, droplets fell from it and formed islands, with Onokoro 
being the ﬁrst. This creation caused much delight between the two and they descended to the 
island and made it their home.

4
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

In  its  centre  Izanagi  and  Izanami  erected  a  pillar  which  was  named  Heavenly  August  Pillar. 
Around  the  pillar  they  built  a  great  palace  called  the  Hall  of  Eight  Fathoms. Then,  the  two 
circled the pillar from opposite directions. When they met, Izanami greeted the handsome man 
approaching her and Izanagi greeted the beautiful maiden but told Izanami that it was improper 
for a woman to anticipate the greetings of a man. That settled, they embraced and from this ﬁrst 
embrace came a creature that was boneless and leech-like. Disgusted, Izanami and Izanagi placed 
the creature in a basket of reeds and set it adrift on the water. Izanagi and Izanami embraced once 
more but the progeny was as disappointing as the ﬁrst. Seeking an answer, the two ascended to 
Heaven and sought council. ‘The reason,’ they were told, ‘is because the woman took precedence 
over the man when the ﬁrst words were uttered.’ Full of understanding, Izanagi and Izanami 
returned to Onokoro and repeated their steps around the Heavenly August Pillar but this time, 
Izanagi greeted Izanami ﬁrst. When they embraced, the offspring was, this time, perfect and was 
the island Awaji. Next came Shikoku, followed by Oki and Kyushu; after that, Tsushima was 
made and ﬁnally, Honshu. The two deities named the islands Oyashi- ma-kuni, the Country of 
the Eight Great Islands and Izanagi and Izanami continued to embrace, creating thousands of 
smaller island children that ﬂoated around the eight great islands.

The Japanese Islands

Japan consists of four main islands and countless smaller islands scattered around its coastline, 
stretching for some 3,000 kilometres end to end. The main islands are Hokkaido, land of the 
Caucasian, barbaric Ainu, Honsh, Kysh and Shikoku. There is mountainous terrain throughout, 
with little in the way of farmable land – perhaps a tenth of the total landmass of 378,000 square 
kilometres. Many of the islands’ mountains are volcanic and whilst most are extinct, perhaps 
30 or so are still active, including Mount Fuji. Japan also lies on a major fault-line in the earth, 
leading to earthquakes and tsunami, which are much more of a threat than volcanic eruption.

Climate
The Japanese climate is humid, with oppressively hot summer months followed by torrential 
autumn rains, making it possible to experience 11 or 12 centimetres of rain in a single day; this 
means ﬂash-ﬂoods and mudslides are yearly threats with entire villages sometimes being washed 
away in a torrent of blackened, unstoppable mud that pours down from the hills. Yet the seasons 
are clearly deﬁned; in the glorious spring, cherry blossom creates a blanket of peach across the 
country and in the autumn the trees turn from green to burnished gold, amber and bronze; both 
are seasons of great beauty and considered to be special times for all of Japan. The summers 
and winters can be harsh and oppressive. In the summer, monsoon rains are frequent, especially 
in the south and in the winter deep snows are known throughout the mountain regions when 
temperatures plummet to below freezing, especially in the northern island of Hokkaido. The 
central basin, around Lake Biwa and the capital, Heian, is less extreme, with warmer temperatures 
in both the winter and summer months.

Hokkaido
Hokkaido  is  frequently  referred  to  as  Yezo,  a  catch-all  description  for  any  land  north  of 
Honshu. The central area of the island is mountainous and volcanic, surrounded by the coastal 
plains. Summers  are cool and winters icy; in the winter months Hokkaido is buried  under 
thick snow and its lakes and rivers turn into vistas of wintry beauty as the local kami sleep and 
allow the island to succumb to the cold.

Hokkaido is the land of the Ainu, a Caucasian people who claim to have arrived 100,000 years 
before the Japanese (‘the children of the sun’, as the Ainu know them) appeared in the southern 
islands. It is claimed by the Ainu that they occupied Honshu before the Japanese and were driven 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

5

from  these  lands  centuries  ago,  being  pushed  back  into  Hokkaido.  Whilst  considered  to  be 
barbarians, with a distinctly undeveloped (by Japanese standards) civilisation, they nevertheless 
engage  in  trade  with  the  Dewa  and  Mutsu  Provinces  of  Honshu. Their  social  traditions  are 
simple; hunter-gatherers with no form of central government. Their language is also distinctly 
un-Japanese  with  a  complex  word  structure  very  different  from  the  language  of  the  south. 
Tattooing is common, beginning at a young age with the tattoos being worn around the mouth, 
gradually stretching across the lower half of the face. As most men wear thick beards and long 
hair, with little attention to personal grooming, the tattoos become obscured with age.

The Ainu live in small, close-knit extended families, building thatched huts around a central 
hall. Like the Japanese, they believe in the kami but hold Grandmother Earth in reverence 
above Amaterasu-no-kami, the Sun Goddess. There are no priests per se in Ainu settlements; 
all religious matters being attended to by the clan elders. When an Ainu dies, he believes his 
immortal spirit will travel to the Land of the Gods, there to hunt and live with the kami and 
perhaps, in time, become a kami himself.

The Ainu and the Japanese have clashed violently on several occasions. In the early Heian period 
the Ainu made settlements in northern Mutsu province, driving out the Japanese natives. In 
response to this Sakanouye Tamuramaro was sent by the Emperor Saga to reclaim the lands. 
Tamuramaro used force and tactics to drive the Ainu to the edge of Mutsu and then back to 
Hokkaido. He then established permanent garrisons at Izawa and Shiba to hold the Ainu at bay 
from northern Honshu. Sakanouye Tamuramaro was awarded the title Sei-i-Tai-Shogun, which 
translates to Barbarian Subduing General – the ﬁrst commander to hold the Shogun title.

Honshu
Largest and most heavily populated, Honshu is the heart of Japan. The capital, Heian, is located 
here on Lake Biwa and it is central to all the social and cultural developments of the era. Honshu 
has the majestic Mount Fuji, the tallest mountain and an active volcano; the Shinano River (also 
known as Chikuma) is the longest in Japan, rising from Mount Kobushi, almost in the centre of 
the island and ﬂowing to the north-west, where it meets with the Sai River. Extremely hilly and 
mountainous, the bulk of the populace is located in the Kanto plain in the eastern quarter of the 
island but communities of varying sizes are scattered throughout the island, occupying the hills 
and lower reaches of the mountains, which run for the length of Honshu. Despite the rigours of 
the terrain, Honshu supports agriculture, cultivating rice, vegetables in the Kanto plain and fruit 
orchards in the Yamanashi region.

Mount Fuji was created in a single day from a ﬂat and fertile land. The farmer who lived in the 
area awoke to ﬁnd the ground shaking and rocking and believing it was an earthquake, took 
to safety with his family. When the disturbance was over, Visu, the farmer, peered out to ﬁnd 
a mountain had appeared in the lands where once he cultivated crops. He named it Fuji-yama, 
‘The Never Dying Mountain’. Mount Fuji has dominated Japanese myth ever since, as indeed, 
have many other mountains. They are revered as the seat of many kami and are worshipped as 
kami in their own right. The tradition of sangaku shinko, meaning ‘mountain beliefs’ is especially 
strong in Honshu, as evinced by the many temples built in the higher reaches of the mountains, 
which have consolidated considerable spiritual and political power – so much so that the temples 
support their own, private armies and frequently engage in armed conﬂict over both political 
issues and points of spiritual doctrine.

Honshu is divided into 51 separate Provinces, each controlled by either a daimyo, local warlords 
or  a  temple.  Beyond  the  provinces  surrounding  the  capital  at  Heian,  rule  is  fragmented  and 
highly subject to local laws and dictates. In the sparsely populated northern Provinces, such as 
Dewa and Mutsu, monsters roam freely, terrorising the inhabitants. 

6
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Kyushu
Whilst predominantly mountainous, some areas are more hospitable than others. Kyushu, the 
most southerly of the main islands, is bountiful, blessed with a balance of lowlands and mountains. 
Hospitable  enough  and  ﬂat  enough  for  traditional  agriculture,  Kyushu  supports  many  small 
farms and holdings raising livestock and growing vegetables. The hills are terraced and given 
over to paddy ﬁelds and throughout the island cedar provides excellent timber and much-needed 
stability to the soil. Kyushu is divided into nine Provinces: Bungo, Buzen, Chikugo, Chikuzen, 
Higo, Hizen, Hyuga, Osumi and Satsuma, each ruled by a powerful daimyo.

It was to Kyushu that Hononinigi, the Heavenly Prince, was sent by Takami-musubi no Kami 
and Amaterasu no Omikami (revered deities of Shinto). Hononinigi brought with him the three 
sacred  regalia  of  Heaven  –  the  Mirror,  Yata,  the  Sword,  Kusanagi  and  the  Magatama  Jewels 
–  which  declared  divine  authority  over  the  island.  Hononinigi  was  accompanied  by  the  ﬁve 
clan chieftains: Ame no Koyane, who became the ancestor of the Nakatomi clan; Futodama, the 
ancestor of the Imibe clan; Ame no Uzume, ancestor of the Sarume clan; Ame no Oshihi, ancestor 
of the Otomo clan; and Amatsukume, ancestor of the Kume clan. These clans still rule in Kyushu 
and  revere  the  Heavenly  Prince,  making  much  of  their  divine  ancestry.  In  the  Heian  period 
Kyushu is thus the domain of the Five Clans and they do not cede readily to the Imperial Court 
of the capital. The three components of the Imperial Regalia are now kept at the Shinto shrine at 
Ise, with high-ranking samurai from each of the ﬁve clans providing a constant guard.

Shikoku
Meaning ‘the four countries’, Shikoku is separated from Honshu by the beautiful Inland Sea 
and divided into four Provinces: Awa, Iyu, Sanuk and Tosa. Divided into northern and southern 
regions by the east-west mountains, Shikoku is supportive of agriculture with rich soils allowing 
a wide variety of grains and fruits to be grown in addition to the staple of rice. Most people live 
in the northern provinces of Awa and Sanuki, whereas Iyo and Tosa are sparsely populated areas 
– mostly isolated farms with suspicious, superstitious peasants.

Shikoku is famed as the birthplace of the monk, Kukai, born in Zentsuji in 774. Kukai founded 
the Shingon sect of Buddhism, following his visit to China and study of tantric practices at the 
mountain temple at Mount Koya is the Shingon Kempo or head temple. Shingon Buddhism is 
highly inﬂuential in the Heian period, especially within the Fujiwara clan. Shikoku is therefore 
an  exceedingly  important  religious  centre,  not  least  for  its  Eighty-Eight  Temple  Pilgrimage 
wherein the devout visit, on foot, each of Shikoku’s 88 temples in turn, 88 being the number of 
‘evil passions’ in Buddhism; the pilgrimage thus represents striving for purity.

Given  Kukai’s  (or  Kobo-daishi,  as  the  monk  s  known  in  Shikoku)  pilgrimage  to  China  and 
return with many concepts embraced by the Japanese, Chinese culture and customs have a far 
stronger inﬂuence in Shikoku than in other parts of Japan. Kukai is said to have brought tea and 
important medicines from China and as the Heian period progresses, Kukai’s inﬂuence is felt 
throughout the islands as his teachings and ﬁndings are spread far and wide by the Fujiwara and 
those allied to them.

Towns and Cities of Japan

Japan is not a populous country; its towns are comparable to large western, villages and its cities, 
with a few exceptions such as Nara and Heiankyo, comparable to large towns. Settlements in the 
more remote provinces are relatively poor, with buildings of wood, bamboo and thatch and are 
often in quite shabby states of repair, depending on the wealth and disposition of the daimyo 
for the area.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

7

Most towns offer Buddhist and Shinto shrines, a tea house that offers basic accommodation and 
the various shop fronts of artisans and merchants, which are also their homes. The ruling classes 
tend to live outside the settlements in large estates beﬁtting their status. Samurai on stipend live 
either within the daimyo’s compound or may have a small lodging or residence in the closest 
settlement. Samurai who have been granted their own land will have built their own property, 
the size of which depends on how much they have to spend.

Japanese cities tend to be built with the buildings relatively close together and often built on a 
grid pattern although some of the older cities, such as Nara, are a little more haphazard. The 
properties of the Kuge and Buke, are segregated and often protected by wooden palisades. Richer 
nobles set their residences in ﬁne gardens but poorer ones make do with small patches of land.

Roads in and between, settlements, are little better than impacted dirt tracks that, in the rains, 
become rivers of churned mud with deep ruts and potholes to catch unwary ankles and cartwheels. 
In the richer cities, like the capital, some streets are cobbled but this is, again, uncommon.

Provinces, Cities and Towns
Province
Aki
Awa
Awa
Awaji
Bingo
Bitchu
Bizen
Bungo
Buzen
Chikugo
Chikuzen
Dewa
Echigo
Echizen
Etchu
Harima
Hida
Higo
Hitachi
Hizen
Hoki
Hyuga
Iga
Iki
Inaba
Ise
Iwaki
Iwami

Island
Honshu
Shikoku
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Kyushu
Kyushu
Kyushu
Kyushu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Kyushu
Honshu
Kyushu
Honshu
Kyushu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu

Major Cities and Towns
Yoshida, Tsuda
Tamioka, Muya
Takeyama
Sumoto
Shohara, Miyoshi
Takahashi
Okayama
Oita, Usuki, Saeki
Kokura, Nakatsu
Wakaisu
Fukuoka, Ori
Yamagata
Niigata
Fukui
Takaoka
Himeji, Ono, Ako
Takayama, Mori, Funatsu
Udo, Kumamoto
Mito, Shimo-Date
Nagasaki, Imari, Shimabara
Sakai, Hashizu
Miyazaki
Ueno
Katsumoto
Tottori
Tsu, Yamada, Kanbe
Shirakawa, Taira
Nagahama, Omori

8
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Province
Iwashiro
Iyo
Izu
Izumi
Izumo
Kaga
Kai
Kawachi
Kazusa
Kii
Kozuke
Mikawa
Mimasaka
Mino
Musashi
Mutsu
Nagato
Noto
Oki
Omi
Osumi
Owari
Sado
Sagami
Sanuki
Satsuma
Settsu
Shima
Shimosa
Shimotsuke
Shinano
Suo
Suruga
Tajima
Tanba
Tango
Tosa
Totomi
Tsushima
Wakasa
Yamashiro
Yamato

Island
Honshu
Shikoku
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Kyushu
Honshu
Island
Honshu
Shikoku
Kyushu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Shikoku
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu
Honshu

Major Cities and Towns
Nihonmatsu, Sukawara
Matsuyama
Atami, Yugashima
Tarui, Sakai
Mori, Matsue, Hirose
Kanazawa
Kofu
Akasaka
Ichinomoya, Sanuki
Yuasa, Shingu, Koya
Yubiso, Kiriu, Takasaki
Koromo
Tsuyama
Yawata, Ogaki, Gifu
Edo, Hachioji
Hirosaki, Kamaishi, Iwagiri, Sendai
Hagi, Yoshida
Wajima, Iida
Saigo
Kusatsu, Hikone
Kajiki
Tsushima, Nagoya
Aikawa, Minato
Ogion, Hakone
Tadotsu, Kotohira
Kamiizumi, Akune, Izukuri
Osaka, Kobe
Taba
Sawara, Chiba
Ashio, Tochigi, Sano
Matsumoto, Iida, Susaka
Yamanouchi
Omiya, Kojima
Hamasaka, Izushi
Fukuchiyama, Sonobe
Miyazu
Kochi
Hamamatsu, Sagara
Takeshi, Izugahara
Obama
Heiankyo, Miyako, Saga
Nara, Yagimoto, Takada, Toba

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

9

The Heian Period

The  Heian  period  spans  398  years  of  Japanese  history,  lasting  from  794,  when  the  Imperial 
capital was relocated from Nara to Heian (now Kyoto), until 1192 when the ﬁrst Shogunate 
was  established,  signalling  true  martial  rule  and  the  beginning  of  the  feudal  era. The  Heian 
period was one of relative peace, punctuated by several decisive martial clashes between temples, 
families, warlords and armies. It was in this period that the samurai began its inexorable rise as 
a social class and saw the Buddhist temples consolidate and exercise their power, both spiritual 
and military, to achieve their own ends. Most of the institutions and cultural traditions that are 
unique to Japan were founded in the Heian period and it was a period that saw the Japanese 
forge their own cultural identity after being dominated by China. The Heian period saw the 
development  of  the  Japanese  alphabet,  the  writing  of  the  ﬁrst  novel  and  profound  religious 
developments within the Japanese Buddhist faith, complete with schisms, political manoeuvring 
and outright bloodshed to achieve certain ends.

In 794 the Emperor, Kammu, decided to encourage people to study and improve, spiritually and 
educationally. He did this in two ways. First, he abolished the traditional, hereditary privileges 
that allowed the sons of high ranking ofﬁcials to take inﬂuential government positions without 
ﬁrst  passing  a  classical  examination. This  ensured  that  the  brightest  and  most  educationally 
enlightened were the ones who moved into the corridors of power, rather than the posts simply 
being  handed-down  to  whoever  came  along  and  had  the  right  family  connections.  Second, 
Kammu introduced a scholarship system for the students of Chinese Classics and History so 
that they would not starve whilst they studied. This attracted people to education and ensured 
that those who were willing to invest in learning would then be better placed to ﬁnd a good job 
within the state once their education was complete. These two reforms laid the foundations for 
the extraordinary development of the Japanese government in the early days of the Heian period. 
Education brought about a cultural and spiritual awareness that allowed the Buddhist faith to 
ﬁrmly secure its own position as an equal state religion with Shintoism. It also led towards many 
cultural shifts that took Japan away from the Chinese systems that had dominated the earlier, 
Nara period. Up until Kammu’s reign, Japan has retained many of the institutions put in place by 
China, including its system of government and its alphabet. Kammu’s reforms allowed people to 
study, question and change these old ways and a truly Japanese culture, with unique philosophies 
and outlooks, began to emerge.

The Heian period was also an enlightened one for women. Although women were still expected 
to be deferential to men, Heian women wielded a great deal of personal power in matters of court 
and government. They were free to pursue their own interests and many of the great literary 
works of the era, such as ‘The Pillow Book’, which details the extraordinary goings-on in courtly 
life, were penned by women. The subjugation women experienced in the later, feudal periods of 
Japanese history are largely absent in Heian Japan and indeed, it was female endeavour that drove 
many of the social and cultural advances of these four centuries.

Despite  this  cultural  prosperity,  the  period  was  not  without  periods  of  strife.  Famine  and 
natural disasters continued to plague Japan and whilst the era is one of relative peace compared 
with the feudal era, the Heian period was beset by petty wars between clans, families, would-
be warlords and even the Buddhist temples. Cultural change brings about conﬂicts of ideology, 
property  and  faith  and  the  rise  of  the  military  classes;  the  samurai  and  sohei,  are  directly 
attributable to the times. 

Indeed, the end of the Heian period is marked by the ﬁnal series of battles known as the Gempei 
Wars  when  two  clans,  the  Minamoto  and  the Taira,  vied  for  complete  control  of  Japan  and 
ﬁelded their warriors in several bloody engagements. The Heian period is thus a time for heroes 

10
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

in all ﬁelds: spiritual, as the cases of Kukai and Saicho, founders of differing schools of Buddhism; 
cultural, as in the case of Kiyohara no Motosuke and his daughter, Sei Shonagon; and militarily, 
with warriors such as Taira Masakomo and Minamoto Yoritome, whose martial prowess and 
strategic brilliance encouraged and embodied the samurai tradition.

Three Families
The Heian period is dominated by three names; three great families. The Fujiwara, the Minamoto 
and the Taira clans consolidated and controlled state power for 400 years. The Fujiwara clan was 
the most inﬂuential but in the late Heian period (1075 onwards), its power reached its peak and 
Fujiwara dominance over the Emperor and state began to diminish as the Insei or Cloistered, 
Emperors shifted the balance of power. 

The Fujiwara clan exercised power by cleverly marrying its female members into the imperial line 
and then acting as regents when the accession took place. Members of the Fujiwara clan were 
either appointed or created appointments for themselves, to all the key ofﬁces of the state, thereby 
threading Japan’s political system with the Fujiwara silk. Its inﬂuence was almost total and whilst 
largely benign, provoked both envy and enmity. The Emperor became little more than a puppet 
for the Fujiwara clan but revered as a kami, few ever considered going against the wishes of the 
Emperor and his Court. Those that did, like Taira Masakado, were ruthlessly put down. Thus, the 
Fujiwara clan, through clever manoeuvring and dynastic engineering, became absolutely central 
to the Heian power structure, ensuring its members were placed in every key position and always 
ready  to  further  Fujiwaran  interests,  whilst  keeping  in  the  check  the  upstart  ambitions  of  the 
Minamoto and Taira.

The  Minamoto  clan  grew  out  of  those  males  in  the  Imperial  Court  who  were  ineligible  for 
accession to the throne. The Emperor Saga was the ﬁrst to bestow the title of Minamoto (known 
also as the Genji, a contraction of the Chinese character, gen, for Minamoto and uji, for family) 
and several others followed suit. Those given the Minamoto surname ceased to be members of 
the Imperial family and were allowed to forge their own destiny. The key Minamoto holdings are 
in the centre and north of Honshu but as the Minamoto line has grown, it has split into many 
separate family factions – all united by the Genji name – and so its inﬂuence spreads throughout 
Japan. 

The Taira clan, dominating southern Honshu’s, grew in a similar way to the Minamoto, with 
their honoriﬁc surname being granted by the Emperor when certain members of Court became 
subjects and thus ineligible to succeed to imperial power. The Taira are also known by the title 
Heike,  another  contraction  of  the  Chinese  hei  and  ke,  meaning  family. The Taira  clan  came 
to dominate the Imperial Court in much the same way that the Fujiwara did but had a much 
shorter exercise in such power. Throughout the Heian period the Minamoto and Taira clans 
maintained an intense rivalry which culminated in the Gempei War at the end of the Heian era 
and saw the Taira’s demise. This ﬁnal confrontation between these two immense clans signalled a 
change in the way Japan was ruled, passing from a civil state into the military dominance of the 
Shogunate, under Minamoto control.

Rise of the Samurai
The accretions of power brought about by the economic and social changes of the Heian period 
led to many family and clan heads becoming wealthy shoen or landowners. To maintain their 
status and police their lands they found it necessary to form their own private armies. Previously 
the  army  had  served  the  Imperial  Court  solely  but  the  mid  Heian  period  sees  a  shift  in  the 
power-base, especially when various political reforms were suggested to curb the growing wealth 
and status of the shoen. The private armies of the landed families became factions in their right 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

11

and began to strengthen the codes of honour and prestige that had begun in their imperial days.
These were the samurai. The name is linked to a warrior but in reality the samurai are an entire 
social caste, dedicated to service and committed to the codes of honour ensuring that service. In 
the Heian period the status of samurai is a title of prestige and difﬁcult to acquire although it is 
possible for humble spearmen to cross social ranks and become samurai, gaining all the privileges 
of the class. During the 10th Century the allegiance of the samurai shifted from direct support 
of the Emperor to the shoen of the outlying provinces. The samurai pledged loyalty to a family 
or clan head – a daimyo – and in return were paid well for their efforts. The samurai protected 
estates and holdings from rebels, robbers and bandits and when the occasion called for it, against 
other daimyo.

Many of the samurai families serving in this way were, initially, of relatively humble origins but 
through their dedication they attained further prestige and personal wealth allowing them, in 
turn, to become shoen. Some samurai claimed to have aristocratic lineage, usually from some 
minor imperial noble sent out into the provinces to make his own way in life. These particular 
clans, able to trace their lineage to the Emperor, found it easier to gather allies and followers, 
strengthening their positions. The two best examples are the Minamoto and Taira clans, which 
through  being  entitled  by  the  Emperor,  went  on  to  accrue  private  armies  that  ensured  their 
positions. The samurai class thus rose to a role of considerable social and military importance 
during  the  Heian  period  and  this  importance  and  continuing  accrual  of  wealth  led  to  the 
samurai ﬁnally shifting the power-base of Japan to the ﬁrst Shogunate and the start of the feudal 
era where everyone deferred to the samurai.

Rise of the Warrior Monks
With the move of the capital from Nara to Heiankyo, the amount of power and inﬂuence the 
Nara temples had on the Emperor and Court was reduced. When the new temples were founded 
on  Mount  Hiei,  the  Nara  temples  were  angered  and  resentful. The  temple  of  Enryakuji  on 
Mount Hiei was designed to operate outside of the Ofﬁce of Monastic Affairs, which was subject 
to Nara dominance and it rapidly came to dominate the aristocracy through its development of 
Tendai Buddhism. Nara was thus supplanted as the spiritual centre of Japan and deeply envious 
of Enryakuji.

To protect their own interests, which were frequently disputed, the Mount Hiei and Nara 
temples began to employ armed security men, drawn from low-ranking samurai, ronin and 
those with martial prowess who had come to the monasteries for spiritual reasons. Over time 
and as the disputes between temples and sects within temples, became more serious, the role of 
these security forces expanded. The sohei evolved from being straight forward temple guards 
into well-trained, well-armed private armies that helped enforce temple business, protect the 
high ranking priests when they descended from the mountain or left their temples and to 
undertake certain acts that Buddhist priests, reverential of life, could not conduct directly. 
The sohei developed into formidable forces and towards the end of the Heian period, during 
the Gempei Wars, sohei proved to valuable allies to the warring Minamoto and Taira clans.

The sohei are religiously devout but as they are un-ordained as priests, they are able to conduct 
themselves in ways forbidden to the priesthood. Sohei are feared and respected in equal measure 
and whilst they occupy a social strata quite separate to the samurai, their skills as warriors are 
every bit as legendary.

In  addition  to  the  sohei  there  are  also  the yamabushi  (‘Mountain Warriors’). The  yamabushi 
are  quite  distinct  from  the  sohei,  although  the  two  terms  are  sometimes  interchanged. The 
yamabushi, whilst certainly warrior monks, are not organized into armies in the same manner as 

12
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

the sohei. Yamabushi are adherents to the Buddhist sect of Shugendo, which combines elements 
of Shinto and esoteric Buddhism and have their own rituals and secrets that are quite distinct 
from the main Buddhist factions. The key sects served by the yamabushi are the mountains of 
Ominesan (Kinbusen-ji), Koyasan (Yamoto province), Ushiroyama (Bitchu province), Daisen 
(Hoki province), Kumano (Kii province) and various mountains in Dewa province.

When should I set my Samurai of Legend campaign?
The  timeline  in  this  chapter  is  extensive  enough  for  Games  Masters  to  set  a  Samurai  of 
Legend campaign at any point in the Heian period. The default date from the point of view 
of this book is 1001; Ichijo is Emperor, the Fujiwara clan is at the height of its power and the 
Minamoto and Taira clans are developing and consolidating their own. The various Buddhist 
temples are divided and fractious, with established sohei armies and the various shoen lords 
are becoming daimyo in their own right, attracting samurai and emulating the achievements 
of the Minamoto and Taira clans; allying with one or the other or attempting to create their 
own dynasties. In the hills and hidden valleys disenfranchised sorcerers are displeased at being 
outlawed and plotting their own schemes against the Imperial Court and the mighty Fujiwara 
clan. Seeing the rise of the Great Families and wanting to emulate them, oni and bakemono 
lords (see the Creatures of Japan chapter) are establishing their own territories in the more 
remote parts of Japan, terrorizing locals and imposing yet further burdens on a beleaguered 
Imperial Court. This is a time ripe for great feats and adventure but Games Masters can easily 
advance or regress the speciﬁc date if they so wish.

A Chronology of the Heian Period
Spanning almost four centuries, the Heian period is ﬁlled with everything needed for intrigue 
and adventure. The machinations of the various clans offer untold opportunities for political 
scheming, double-crosses and armed confrontation. The rivalry between the various Buddhist 
temples offer similar opportunities but from a different perspective.

Also included in this chronology are some entirely ﬁctional events to contrast with the historical 
ones. These concern mainly the incursions of various supernatural forces into the world either 
through the machinations of certain disenfranchised sorcerers or in response to the general 
turmoil Japan experiences during the middle and later Heian period. These mythic events are 
included to act as a spur and focus for a fantasy campaign and can be easily ignored if a purely 
historical campaign is preferred.

794: The Emperor Kammu moves the Imperial Court and capital city from Nara to Heiankyo. 
In the same year Kammu initiates his educational reforms to encourage people into education.

805: Private debts and outstanding taxes are cancelled in recognition of the fact that the cost of 
building the new capital and continuing military campaigns in the northern provinces (against 
the Ainu and others) is becoming unbearable for Japanese citizens.

805:  The  Tendai  sect  of  Buddhism  is  founded  by  Saicho  (also  known  as  Dengyo  Daishi) 
establishing the Tendai sect of Buddhism. The Imperial Court and government view the sect 
with great favour owing to its willingness to remain aloof from politics. The sect founds the ﬁrst 
of its monasteries, Enryakuji, on Mount Hiei, north-east of the capital.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

13

806: Heizei (Kammu’s son) becomes Emperor. In the same year Kukai (Kobo Daishi) founds 
the Shingon sect of Buddhism but the main temple will be built 10 years later on Mount Koya 
in the Kii province of Honshu.

807: By government edict sorcerers, diviners and priests are forbidden to seduce, inﬂuence or 
intimidate the common masses. This edict forces those sorcerers and magicians who had been 
openly practicing magic to ﬂee into exile; many developed direct grudges against the Emperor 
and  the  Court  and  began  plotting  their  revenge.  By  contrast,  the  Court  and  government 
continues to call upon the services of certain sorcerers and priests from time to time to use their 
inﬂuence in precisely the ways banned by the edict.

809: Suffering from what is thought to be severe depression, Heizei abdicates the throne and 
retires  to  Nara.  His  younger  brother,  Prince  Kamino,  becomes  the  Emperor  Saga.  One  year 
later Heizei, accompanied by his chief advisor, Fujiwara Nakanari and his consort Kusuko and 
her brother, conspires to retake the throne by forcing the return of the capital from Heiankyo 
to Nara. Many claim that Heizei had considerable sorcerous help in his schemes but the plot is 
thwarted after much bloodshed and Heizei is forced to become a monk. The other conspirators 
are forced to commit seppuku.

816: Kukai is given permission to establish a monastery on Mt. Koya in Kii province.

822: The temple of Enryakuji is given permission to establish independent ordinations of priests, 
which sunders the monopoly of ordination held by the temples of Nara and directly challenges 
the authority of the old capital. This is the beginning of schisms within the Buddhist faith and 
which will lead to open conﬂict – political and military – between the various sects.

823: Emperor Saga abdicates and is replaced by his younger brother, who becomes the Emperor 
Junna.

823: The sect of Esoteric Buddhism begins in Japan when Kukai is given the task of completing 
the construction of the Toji temple in Heiankyo and to manage its affairs once complete.

833: Nimmyo becomes Emperor.

850: Death of Emperor Nimmyo. Montoku becomes Emperor.

858: With the death of Emperor Montoku, the nine-year old Seiwa becomes Emperor. Fujiwara 
Yoshifusa, Seiwa’s maternal grandfather, becomes the ﬁrst Fujiwara Regent, holding power until 
872. 

868:  A  schism  in  the Tendai  sect  splits  the  monks  of  Enryakuji  into  two  separate  sects:  the 
Sammonha  (known  as  the Temple  Gate  sect)  and  the  Ennin,  both  named  after  rival  abbots. 
A third faction arises in the Miidera temple located at the foot of Mount Hiei, known as the 
Enchin sect.

877: Seiwa abdicates the throne and is replaced by another nine-year old, Yozei (who was often 
said to be criminally insane). Fujiwara Mototsune becomes Regent.
884: Yozei is forced by Fujiwara Mototsune to abdicate. The true reasons for the abdication 
are  hidden  from  the  populace  but  people  speak  of Yozei  communing  with  dark  forces  and 
entertaining sorcerers. Koko becomes Emperor.

14
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

887: Koko dies and Uda becomes the Emperor. Because Uda’s mother is not a Fujiwara by birth, 
Uda hopes to re-establish direct rule without Fujiwaran inﬂuence.

897: Uda abdicates in favour of his son, who becomes the Emperor Daigo.

902:  An  imperial  edict  is  issued  calling  for  the  resumption  of  the  system  of  allotting  land 
according to the number of people in the household. The system had not been enforced due to 
its impossibility to administer effectively. The edict is generally ignored as farmers lease or sell 
their land (with local ofﬁcial connivance, of course) and go to work on large estates in order to 
escape the tax burden associated with land ownership.

930: Suzaku, Daigo’s eleventh son, becomes Emperor at 14 years old. Fujiwara Tadahira becomes 
Regent holding power until 949.

939  -  940:  Taira  Masakado  stages  a  rebellion.  Masakado  begins  with  an  attack  on  the 
government’s outpost in Hitachi Province and the governor is made prisoner. In the winter 
of 939 Masakado conquers both Shimotsuke and Kozuke provinces and awards himself the 
title of Shinno (New Emperor). The government in Heiankyo responds by putting a bounty 
on  Masakado’s  head  and,  59  days  later,  his  cousin,  Sadamori,  whose  father  Masakado  had 
attacked and killed, kills Masakado at the Battle of Kojima. Masakado’s head is duly taken 
back to Heiankyo.

946:  Murakami  becomes  Emperor,  supported  by  Fujiwara  Tadahira.  Murakami  gives  the 
impression of being a direct ruler but in reality the Fujiwara power-base has been consolidated 
and  he  is  just  as  much  a  puppet  as  preceding  emperors  assisted  by  a  regent.  In  reality The 
brothers Fujiwara no Sanetomo and Fujiwara no Morosuke are the de facto rulers of Japan.

949:  The  ﬁrst  major  incident  between  the  Buddhist  sects  occurs  when  monks  from  Nara’s 
Todaiji temple gather at the residence of an ofﬁcial in Heiankyo to protest against a religious 
appointment that has displeased them. Monks from Enryakuji oppose them and a brawl ensues 
in which several monks are killed.

967: Reizei becomes titular Emperor. Fujiwara Saneyori becomes Regent.

968: Minamoto Mitsunaka, holder of the title Chinfuju-shogun and is commander of the armies 
in  the  north,  denounces  his  kinsman Takaaki  for  conspiring  to  revolt  against  the  Emperor, 
thus foiling the Anna Plot. In return, the Fujiwara help the Minamoto to grow in power and 
popularity. Several demonstrations by various temple factions, chieﬂy the Kofukuji monks of 
Nara, are targeted against the Fujiwara family.

969-970: Reizei abdicates the throne. Enyu becomes Emperor, with Fujiwara Koretada becoming 
Regent.  Several  Kofukuji  monks  are  killed  by  Todaiji  monks  when  a  dispute  over  temple 
lands degenerates into violence. Ryogen, the chief abbot of Enryakuji, decides to maintain a 
permanent garrison at the temple, thus heralding the establishment of the sohei (warrior-monks). 
This decision runs counter to previous edicts Ryogen had issued, aimed at curbing the excesses 
of the Enryakuji monks; speciﬁcally: conﬁnement to Mount Hiei during their 12 year training 
period and being forbidden to cover their faces or carry weapons.

972: Fujiwara Kanemichi becomes Regent, remaining in power until 977

977: Fujiwara Yoritada becomes Regent.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

15

981: Armed confrontation between the Ennin and Enchin sects occurs when Yokei of the Enchin is 
named as the Imperial Court’s choice as the abbot of the Hosshoji temple. The Ennin are angered 
because traditionally the Hosshoji abbot has always been from their sect. When the Imperial Court 
refuses  to  reconsider  its  decision,  some  200  monks  from  the  Ennin  faction  conduct  a  violent 
demonstration in the capital at the residence of Fujiwara Yoritada. When they return to Mount 
Hiei they intimidate the Enchin sect so badly that the latter ﬂees the mountain. A group of 300 
Enchin remain at their temple at Senjuin and Ryogen orders an armed assault against them. Major 
bloodshed is averted only when Yokei agrees to stand-down as the Hossihoji abbot.

984: Kazan becomes the 65th Emperor. He is only 17 and rules for just two years but during this 
brief period he commissions the Shui Wakashu, a collection of 1,351 poems or waka

986: Kazan is tricked into abdicating by Fujiwara no Kaneie and Ichijo becomes Emperor with 
Fujiwara Kaneiye his Regent. Kazan becomes a monk.

990: Fujiwara Michitaka becomes Regent, lasting for ﬁve years when he is replaced by Fujiwara 
Michikane. Michikane lasts for only seven days, dying in ofﬁce.

996: Fujiwara Michinaga becomes Regent.

999: The bakemono Lord Enezga seizes territories in the Iwami province and establishes his own 
court, drafting-in Ainu mercenaries and gaining the support of the sorcerer Sushigawa. Local 
kami are murdered with the fabled Sword of Seven Cuts and the Buddhist temples deﬁled. The 
Minamoto  and Taira  clans,  both  of  which  have  interests  in  Iwami  province,  form  an  uneasy 
alliance and mount a three-year campaign to oust Enezga. The war is ﬁerce and many die on 
both sides but several heroes emerge.

1000:  Awabi  sea  demons  begin  attacking  ships  in  the  Inland  Sea,  dragging  sailors  down  to 
their depths of a watery hell. On the island of Sado, the Hisa-Me demons over-run the local 
settlements, led by the oni Magaru-Ie. Sado is declared a no-go area by the Regent.

1001: The sorcerer, Tanagaro, travels to Heiankyo in disguise, concerned with working magic 
against the Fujiwara clan and the Emperor. A three-year search is undertaken for the sorcerer 
and a series of mysterious deaths occur amongst the Fujiwara. Many ordinary people are accused 
of being Tanagaro associates and several show trials condemn them to death. Tanagaro is never 
found.

1003: The island of Oki becomes the realm of Hoji, a spirit of pure evil who dwells in a column 
of stone that was once located on the moors of Nau. A host of ghosts and other malign spirits 
support him. The twin sorcerers Awaji and Awina are credited with stealing the stone column 
from Nau and moving it to Oki in order to perform dark rites.

1004: The Centipede, long thought to have been killed by the hero Hidesato, is sighted again in 
the mountains north of Lake Biwa. A reward of 1,000 koku and clan status is offered to whoever 
kills it. The white sorcerer Basharo, a fallen Buddhist monk, claims that the Centipede can only 
be killed if Hidesato’s sword is recovered from Hell.

1006: Roads all across Japan are beset by nurikabe – invisible walls that slow-down travel and 
disorient travellers. Sorcerers are blamed.

1007: The dai-kumo (giant spider) Jijiri terriﬁes the southern provinces of Honshu and is driven 
across the isthmus to Kyushu but it is not destroyed. It gives birth to 1,000 kumo which rampage 

16
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

across the island. Many families send samurai to liberate Kyushu and kill Jijiri. Later, territorial 
disputes break-out between the clans and families involved in the liberation.

1011: Sanjo becomes Emperor. By 1016 his sight has become so bad that he is persuaded to 
abdicate by Fujiwara Michinaga.

1016: Go-Ichijo becomes Emperor. (Go as a preﬁx means “the second.”).

1017:  Fujiwara  Yorimichi  becomes  Kampaku  (chief  adviser  to  the  Emperor).  Meanwhile, 
Minamoto Yorinobu founds the Kawachi Genji line in Kawachi province.

1019: A noblewoman, Murasaki Shikibu, completes the Genji Monogatari (‘The Tales of Genji’). 
This is the world’s ﬁrst novel and is written for the women of the Imperial Court. The Genji 
Monogatari concerns the life of one of the Emperor’s sons, known as Genji, concentrating on 
his romantic life. Genji is noted for his nobility towards women and never abandons a single 
one of his wives, although he engages on a long and sometimes unfulﬁlling, series of romantic 
adventures that includes the abduction of a 10 year old girl with whom he becomes infatuated. 
After Genji dies, the novel continues to follow the lives of Niou and Kaoru, Genji’s best friends.

1028: Taira Tadatsune leads a revolt in the provinces of Kazusa, Shimosa, and Awa as he attempts to 
extend the territory under his control. The Imperial Court seeks to stop him and nominates Minamoto 
no Yorinobu, Governor of Ise Province, to lead the attack. Yorinobu refuses and so the Court appoints 
Taira no Naokata and Nakahara Narimichi, who make little progress against Tadatsune and are soon 
recalled. The governor of Awa ﬂees to Heiankyo in 1030 and in 1031 Minamoto no Yorinobu the 
governor of Kai province, pursues Tadatsune. Knowing he could not defeat Yorinobu, Tadatsune 
surrenders without a ﬁght and is taken prisoner but dies on the way to the capital.

1036: Go-Ichijo dies. Go-Suzaku becomes Emperor.

1045: Go-Suzaku dies. Go-Reizei becomes the 70th Emperor.

1050: Minamoto Yoriyoshi is appointed as both governor and commander-in-chief of Mutsu 
Province in the north, speciﬁcally to subdue the Abe family who, under Abe Yoritoki, are levying 
taxes and conﬁscating land at will. This marks the start of The Early Nine Years War. Yoritoki is 
killed by Yoriyoshi’s forces in 1057 but the Abe family ﬁghts on under Abe Sadato, inﬂicting a 
major defeat on Minamoto Yoriyoshi when his warriors are caught in a blizzard and forced to 
abandon  their  attack  against  Sadato’s  stockade.  Sadato  launched  a  daring  counter-attack  and 
inﬂicted heavy casualties. Despite losing this engagement, Yoryoshi’s 13 year old son, Yoshiie, 
earns the title Hachimantaro – the ﬁrst born son of the war kami Hachiman; an accolade for both 
Yoshiie and his father (who was noted for deeply caring about the welfare of his men). The Abe 
family is ﬁnally subdued in 1062 after Abe Sadato is defeated and killed.

1068:  Go-Reizei  dies.  Go-Sanjo  becomes  Emperor  with  Fujiwara  Norimichi  as  Regent.  Go-
Sanjo’s rule is marked by attempts to regulate trade and strengthen the Imperial coffers, which 
have been severely depleted. His attempts are largely in vain and in 1072 he abdicates in favour 
of Shirakawa.

1072: Shirakawa becomes Emperor and Go-Sanjo becomes the Cloistered Emperor under the 
Insei system. This ancient system of rule permits an abdicating Emperor to continue exerting 
power. Despite the fact that Go-Sanjo soon becomes ill and dies, he has managed to weaken the 
Fujiwara Regency. Although the Fujiwara still hold important positions, this begins the period 
where the retired emperor – not a regent - controls the government.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

17

1075: Fujiwara Morozane becomes Regent

1083: Minamoto Yoshiie, Hachimantaro, is appointed governor of Mutsu Province and with the 
help of Fujiwara Kiyohira, leads troops to put down an insurrection of the Kiyowara family in 
Kanazawa. This is known as The Later Three Years War. Yoshiie is an excellent samurai commander, 
having studied various Chinese military classics. At the end of each day’s campaigning, Yoshiie 
examines his men’s performance and assigns the bravest warrior of the day ‘The Bravery Seat’ 
whilst the worst is forced to occupy ‘The Cowardice Seat’.

1086:  Shirakawa  abdicates  in  favour  of  his  son,  Horikawa.  Shirakawa  becomes  Cloistered 
Emperor.

1091: Minamoto Yoshiie’s military successes allow him to consolidate his own power base with 
extensive estates and samurai retainers. Fearing his growing power and formidable reputation, the 
Imperial Court issues an edict forbidding farmers to commend their lands to him and declares 
that his samurai are forbidden to enter the capital city with him. Yoshiie, however, with a full 
retinue, returns to the capital after the Three Year War and resumes his posts as Commander of 
the Palace Guards and the Sovereign’s Escort.

1094: Fujiwara Moromichi becomes Regent but dies in 1099 after being cursed by rebellious 
monks who are causing trouble in the city until he takes action to stop them. The rebellious 
monks are subdued, thanks, in large part, to the help of Yoshiie and his samurai. Dark rumours 
circulate in the Imperial Court that the curse that killed Moromichi was constructed with the 
help  of  the  various  sorcerers  in  hiding  around  Honshu.  The  supposedly  immortal  sorcerer, 
Tanagaro, is blamed as the ringleader.

1105: Fujiwara Tadazane becomes Regent.

1107: Emperor Horikawa dies. His son, Toba, becomes Emperor with Shirakawa remaining as 
Insei Emperor.

1108: Minamoto Yoshiie’s eldest son, Yoshichika, is banished to Sanuki for an offence against the 
court. He escapes and returns to Izumo where he leads an uprising. This uprising is put down by 
Taira Masamori who is commended by the Emperor.

1121: Fujiwara Tadamichi becomes Regent.

1123: Toba abdicates in favour of his son, Sutoku. Shirakawa continues as Insei Emperor.

1129: Taira Tadamori, the son of Taira Masamori, subdues several rebellions and piracy on the 
inland sea. Like his father, he is given court rank in return and this signals the rise of military 
as a dominant force, something that will inevitably lead to the establishment of the Shogunate.

1129: Insei Shirakawa dies and Toba takes his place.

1136: A monster – an Oni summoned by Tanagaro or one of his disciples, such as the exiled 
Lady Nagara no Muji – rampages through the Imperial palace, slaying several Court ofﬁcials and 
heading towards the suite of the Emperor’s concubines, intent on rape and murder. Minamoto 
Yorimasa, renowned archer and poet, stops the monster with a single arrow.

1141: Emperor Sutoku abdicates and Konoye becomes takes his place. Toba remains as Insei.

18
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

1153: With Taira Tadamori’s death, Kiyomori becomes head of the Taira clan.

1155:  Konoye  dies,  triggering  a  bitter  succession  dispute  between  the  supporters  of  Go-
Shirakawa on one side and Sutoku on the other. Go-Shirakawa prevails and becomes Emperor. 
Toba remains as Insei.

1156: Fujiwara Yorinaga collects a few hundred warriors, under the leadership of Minamoto 
Tameyoshi and with Sutoku, establishes defences in a palace in the capital. Fujiwara Tadamichi, 
Yorinaga’s brother, with Emperor Go-Shirakawa’s assistance, raises his own army from both the 
Minamoto and the Taira clans challenging Yorinaga. Yorinaga is killed in the battle that follows. 
Taira  Kiyomori  becomes  an  Imperial  favourite  and  advisor,  whilst  Minamoto  Tameyoshi  is 
condemned to death. This period of insurrection is known as the Hogen no Ran and it marks the 
beginning of the ﬁnal struggle for supremacy between the Minamoto and Taira clans.

1158: Go-Shirakawa abdicates (retiring to become Insei) and Nijo becomes Emperor. Fujiwara 
Motozane becomes his Regent.

1160: In an event that comes to be known as the Heiji no Ran or Heiji Insurrection, Minamoto 
Yoshitomo, Tameyoshi’s son and Fujiwara Nobuyori, start another conspiracy to overthrow the 
government, timing it for when Kiyomori leaves the city for a holiday. Leading a force of some 
500 well-armed samurai, they manage to kidnap both Nijo and Go-Shirakawa. Nobuyori appoints 
himself Chancellor. Kiyomori is forced to return to Heiankyo and raise an army of his own, helping 
to free the Emperor and ex-Emperor from the palace. Weeks of ﬁghting across the capital ensue but 
eventually the uprising is crushed, with the help of sohei from Mount Hiei. Yoshitomo is betrayed 
and killed by one of his retainers and the only Minamoto males remaining from the main family 
are his sons Yoritomo, Noriyori and Yoshitsune.

1165:  Emperor  Nijo  dies  and  is  succeeded  by  Rokujo,  who  is  only  a  year  old  when  he  is 
enthroned. Go-Shirakawa remains as Insei.

1166: Fujiwara Motofusa becomes Regent
.
1168: Rokujo is deposed by Go-Shirakawa, following pressure from the Taira clan and Takakura, 
Rokujo’s  uncle  becomes  new  Emperor  –  even  though  he  is  only  three  years  older  than  his 
predecessor. Go-Shirakawa remains as Insei. Takakura’s mother is Taira Kiyomori’s sister-in-law 
and this leads to the rapid rise of the Taira clan’s power, supplanting that of the Fujiwara clan.

1175: Honen Shonin founds the Jodo or Pure Land, sect of Buddhism, the ﬁrst truly independent 
Japanese Buddhist sect. For much of his life Honen was a devout monk of the Tendai school but 
as Honen began to approach middle age he began to rethink the Tendai system. Honen read a 
Chinese text called the Commentary on the Pure Land Meditation Sutra and came to believe that 
chanting the name of Amida Buddha was all one needed to enter Amida Buddha’s Pure Land, 
completely  negating  negative  karma.  He  further  believed  that  social,  religious  or  intellectual 
standing had no bearing on entering the Pure Land. Honen thus relocated to the district of Otani 
in Heiankyo where he started to preach to crowds of ordinary men and women and establishing 
a considerable following. Many that were traditionally excluded from Buddhist practices, such 
as  prostitutes,  butchers,  fortune-tellers  and  others,  ﬂock  to  hear  him  speak.  Honen  develops 
an excellent reputation and many priests and noblemen, including the regent, Kujo Kanezane, 
join the Jodo sect. By 1204 Honen has around 200 disciples, ranging from laypeople through 
to samurai. 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

19

1177:  Several  minor  Fujiwara  nobles  plot  to  assassinate  Kiyomori.  Kiyomori  discovers  the 
conspiracy  and  has  most  of  the  plotters  killed.  In  the  same  year,  a  great  ﬁre  sweeps  through 
Heiankyo, destroying about a third of the city and killing thousands.

1179: Fujiwara Motomichi becomes Regent. In the same year and in response to Go-Shirakawa 
seizing  Taira  properties,  Kiyomori  marches  into  the  capital  with  several  thousand  troops  in 
retaliation. Go-Shirakawa is placed under house arrest and numerous high government ofﬁcials 
are either banished or reduced in rank. This heralds the beginning of the Gempei Wars.

The Gempei Wars: 1180 – 1185
The Gempei Wars consist of many battles fought across the provinces, with power constantly 
shifting  between  the  Taira  and  the  Minamoto,  with  Go-Shirakawa  at  the  centre.  Intrigues, 
double-crosses and ﬁerce battles between two expert samurai commanders, Taira Kiyomori and 
Minamoto Yoritome, characterise the ﬁve years of the Gempei and the ﬁnal ﬁve years of the 
glorious Heian era.

1180:  Having  witnessed  Kiyomori’s  treatment  of  Go-Shirakawa,  Takakura  abdicates  and 
Antoku, Kiyomori’s two-year old grandson, becomes Emperor. Go-Shirakawa remains as Insei 
and Kiyomori becomes the effective Head of State.

Minamoto Yorimasa, who was a respected member of the government, having refrained from 
taking sides with the Minamoto against Kiyomori and the Taira, plots to overthrow Antoku 
and Kiyomori and place Prince Mochihito, the son of Go-Shirakawa, on the throne. However 
the scheme is thwarted by Kiyomori and while trying to escape, Prince Mochihito is captured 
and killed while Yorimasa is wounded and chooses to commit seppuku.

In  the  summer  Kiyomori  forces  the  Emperor  and  Insei  to  move  the  Imperial  residence  to 
Fukuwara, Kiyomori’s residence on the Inland Sea. The plan fails and the entire Court is forced 
to return to the capital that winter. Meanwhile, the Todaiji and Kofukuji temples of Nara are 
attacked and burned on orders from Kiyomori, who fears the temples’ military strength.

Minamoto Yoritomo, who had been exiled to Izu under the guard of Hojo Tokimasa, appointed 
by Kiyomori, raises a small group of supporters and attacks and defeats a local Taira ofﬁcial. 
Yoritomo then leads a small body of troops out of Izu and over the Hakone Pass. Yoritomo and 
his samurai clash with Taira forces at the Battle of Ishibashiyama and the Taira army is victorious. 
Yoritomo and his men are scattered but ﬁnd safety in the Hakone mountains.

Undeterred,  Yoritomo  travels  to  the  eastern  provinces  and  raises  a  large  army  before  then 
advancing to the Suruga province. He is met by Taira forces but they are surprised by a rear 
attack from supposed allies and are forced to retreat. Yoritomo does not give pursuit and instead 
remains in Suruga to strengthen his position. Towards the end of 1180 Yoritomo establishes the 
Samurai-dokoro in Kamakura, an ofﬁce which regulates all the necessary affairs of the military, 
thereby centralising and developing a solid strategic platform for further military engagements.

1181: Yoritomo’s uncle, Minamoto Yukiie, leads his troops into Mino province but is defeated 
by Taira forces.  The next month, Kiyomori dies and affairs of state pass to his son, Munemori, 
who has no political skills or acumen at all. The Imperial Court soon descends into disarray. 
Meanwhile,  Taira  forces  once  again  defeat  troops  led  by  Minamoto  Yukiie  at  the  Battle  of 
Sunomata River. In the summer, the Government orders the paciﬁcation of the Hokurikudo 
provinces of the north where the Minamoto are gaining strength and preparing for rebellion. 
Taira samurai are despatched for the task of quelling the Minamoto but are defeated at Echizen 
by Minamoto Yoshinaka, Yoritomo’s cousin.

20
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

1182: Famine sweeps through the western provinces weakening morale in the capital as hunger 
and plague affect thousands. Sorcerers, in league with the Minamoto, are blamed by many and 
countless  kami  are  petitioned  for  help  but  none  is  offered. The  famine  is  so  severe  that  the 
Gempei war is brought to a halt for the year.

1183: Fujiwara Moroiye becomes Regent. That spring Yoritomo launches an attack on Minamoto 
Yoshinaka out of distrust for Yoshinaka’s growing strength and success. The battle stops when the 
two great samurai leaders reach an agreement. Shortly after, Taira Koremori conquers Echizen 
province and seizes several of Yoshinaka’s strongholds. This provokes Yoshinaka into a counter 
attack and he succeeds in recapturing Echizen. Koremori is defeated at the Battle of Tonamiyama 
in Etchu province, which is known as the Battle of Kurikara Pass.

In the summer Yoshinaka advances towards the capital from the north whilst Yukiie threatens 
from the east. Go-Shirakawa manages to escapes Heiankyo, where he is still under house arrest 
since Kiyomori ordered it four years previously. He ﬂees to Mt. Hiei whilst the Emperor and 
his consorts ﬂee to a monastery in the suburbs. The Taira abandon Heiankyo and ﬂee west with 
Emperor Antoku, his mother and a few attendants. Go-Shirakawa is escorted into the capital by 
Yoshinaka and gives him a mandate to destroy Munemori and the Taira army; Yoshinaka prefers 
to attack Yoritomo, who he fears and hates but Go-Shirakawa convinces him to concentrate, 
instead, on the Taira.

By the early autumn the Taira forces have reached Kyushu and established a temporary Court at 
Dazaifu but they are driven out by enraged local samurai and the temporary court is forced to 
move to Yashima, Shikoku, directly across from Kojima Bay in Bizen province.

Yoshinaka pursues the Taira and meets them on the border of Bitchu and Bizen provinces where 
he  is  defeated  at  the  Battle  of  Mizushima.  Following  this  defeat,  Yoshinaka  meets  with  the 
Taira and Fujiwara leaders and a plot to seize the capital is hatched. The plan is to capture Go-
Shirakawa and set up a new government in the Northern provinces. Go-Shirakawa hears of the 
plan and sends word to Yukiie who, in turn, passes word on to Yoritomo.

In the winter, Yoshinaka makes good his plan and seizes the capital; his troops ravage the city 
mercilessly. Yukiie leaves the city with his men and heads to Harima province where he launches 
an attack on the Taira but he is defeated. Go-Shirakawa sends word to Yoritomo asking him to 
come to Heiankyo to subdue Yoshinaka; however, Yoritomo, believing it is better for him to 
consolidate his position in the eastern provinces, ignores the request. After repeated requests, 
though, Yoritomo calls on his brothers, Yoshitsune and Noriyori, to advance on the capital and 
destroy  Yoshinaka.  Yoshinaka  attacks  Hojoji  and  takes  Go-Shirakawa  captive;  he  also  sends 
troops to Ishikawa in Kawachi province to attack the troops of Yukiie who had set up a garrison 
there and was threatening the capital.

1184: With Yoshitsune and Noriyori converging on the capital, Yoshinaka is forced to ﬂee the city 
with only a few men. Noriyori gives chase and catches up with Yoshinaka at Awazu in the province 
of Omi. Yoshnaka is killed in the battle. Next, in the early spring of 1184, Yoshitsune and Noriyori 
lead their troops out of the capital and towards Yashima to attack the Taira and regain the control 
of the Emperor. The Taira abandon Yashima, with the Emperor in tow, by sea. Taira troops land in 
Settsu and begin to build a defensive position while leaving the Emperor on a ship with guards near 
Wada Misaka. However, before the Taira defensive positions at Settsu are completed, Yoshitsune 
and Noriyori attack, overcoming the incomplete defences. Yoshitsune and Noriyori divide their 
forces and encircle the remaining Taira at Ichinotani. In the ensuing battle the Taira forces are 
heavily defeated with the leaders either killed or captured and only a few thousand are able to 
retreat by ship to Yashima, taking the Emperor and the Imperial Regalia with them.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

21

In  the  autumn  Yoritomo  orders  Noriyori  to  leave  Kamakura  and  attack  the Taira.  Yoritomo 
remains  in  Kamakura  to  concentrate  on  making  strategic  decisions  and  dealing  with  the 
diplomatic  problems  of  the  relations  between  the  various  warrior  families  and  their  leaders. 
Yoritomo’s skills as a general are not in question and in this strategic role his skills as a diplomat 
and statesman come to the fore. However, Noriyori’s forces have left Kamakura poorly equipped 
and his troops are brought to a standstill in the far western provinces due to a lack of food, 
supplies and ships.

Yoshitsune is sent to the West to assist Noriyori. He crosses to Shikoku with only a few hundred 
men and attacks the palace in Yashima. The Taira, not knowing the size of the attacking force, 
ﬂee by boat to Dannoura in the Straits of Shimonoseki with Antoku and the Imperial Regalia. 
The Taira are attacked by the Minamoto forces at the Battle of Dan-no-Ura and are defeated. 
The Emperor Antoku, who is only seven years old, ﬂees with his grandmother, Taira no Tokiko, 
the widow of Kiyomori. Tokiko throws herself and the young Emperor into the sea and both are 
drowned; the Imperial Regalia (the Sword, the Mirror and the Jewels) go into the water with her; 
the mirror and jewels are recovered but the sword is lost. Go-Toba, four years old, becomes the 
new Emperor and Go-Shirakawa continues to act as the Insei, appointing Fujiwara Motomichi 
once  more  to  the  post  of  Regent.  Yoshitsune  pursues  the  remaining Taira  forces  and  ﬁnally 
defeats them in a sea battle at Dannoura. 

Thus ends the reign and supremacy of the Taira family and brings to a close the Gempei Wars 
and the Heian period. With the Minamoto victorious and the Imperial Court in ruins (the ﬁnal 
Emperor of the period, Go-Toba, offering a largely ineffectual presence), Minamoto Yoritomo 
takes the position of Shogun (1192) and institutes the so-called ‘Tent Government’, moving 
around the country. By 1198, the power of the Shogunate is complete, supplanting the Regency 
and assuming complete power. Japan passes into its feudal era of military dictatorship.

Emperors in the Heian Period
Kammu   
 
Heizei  
Junna  
Saga  
 
 
Montoku   
Nimmyo   
Seiwa  
 
Yozei 
 
 
Uda 
 
Koko  
 
Suzaku  
Daigo  
 
 
Reizei  
Murakami  
Kazan  
Enyu  
 
 
Ichijo  
 
Sanjo  
 
Go-Suzaku  
Go-Ichijo  
Go-Sanjo   
Go-Reizei  
Horikawa  
Shirakawa  
Toba  
 
Sutoku  
 
Go-Shirakawa  
 
Konoye  
Rokujo  
Nijo  
 
Takakura   
Antoku  
Go-Toba   

(781-806)  
(809-823)  
(833-850)  
(858-876)  
(884-887)  
(897-930)  
(946-967)  
(969-984)  
(986-1011)  
(1016-1036)  
(1045-1068)  
(1072-1086)  
(1107-1123)  
(1141-1155)  
(1159-1165)  
(1169-1180)  
(1184-1198) 

 
 

(806-809)
(823-833)  
(850-858)  
(877-884)  
(887-897)  
(930-946)  
(967-969)  
(984-986)  
(1011-1016)  
(1036-1045)  
(1067-1072)  
(1086-1107)  
(1123-1141)  
(1156-1158)  
(1166-1168)  
(1181-1184)  

22
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

life in japan

The cultures, customs and routines of classical Japan are very different to those of the west and 
this chapter describes and explores the concepts and attitudes that make Japan such a unique 
and fascinating place.

Japanese Given Names

The Character Creation chapter provides an extensive list of family names but characters will 
require  a  given  ﬁrst  name,  also.  Japanese  ﬁrst  names  commonly  consist  of  two  kanji  which 
denote positive characteristics such as intelligence, bravery, beauty, love or names for ﬂowers or 
the order of birth (ﬁrst son, second son and so forth). First names ending with -ro, -shi, -ya or 
-o are typically male ﬁrst names, while names ending in -ko, -mi, -e and -yo are typically female 
ﬁrst names. 

There is almost no limit to the structures of ﬁrst names. Some are exclusively female or male, 
while others can be either. Some names have many different meanings, depending on the kanji 
used to write them.

Female given Names
Female names usually but not always, end in -ko, which means child. Common female names 
include  Akiko  (Autumn  Child),  Haruko  (Spring  Child),  Jun’ko,  Keiko,  Kiyoko,  Michiko, 
Natsuko (Summer Child), Sachiko, Yoshiko (Good Child) and Yukiko (Snow Child).

Male given Names
Male ﬁrst names sometimes indicate the order of birth, using the sufﬁx -ro, the counter for sons. 
For example, Ichiro (ﬁrst son), Jiro (second son), Saburo (third son), Shiro (fourth son), Goro 
(ﬁfth son) and so on. Common male names include Hiroshi, Ken and its many variants (Kenji, 
Ken’ichi), Yoshi and so forth

There are lots of examples of ﬁrst names found throughout this book but the key is imagination 
and using the appropriate naming conventions described here, to develop an authentic sounding 
ﬁrst name. Remember that the given name always follows the family name. Family names are 
provided in greater detail in the following chapter.

Social Outlook

The Japanese are concerned far more with honour and loyalty than with notions of social justice 
and equality. Great respect is placed upon those who observe and conform with the six virtues 
of Charity, Contemplation, Friendship, Loyalty, Sincerity and Wisdom. Graceful and dutiful 
conduct means more than absolute honesty and integrity is a matter of serving and serving well. 

24
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

The Japanese ﬁnd obligations and debt in everything they do. First and foremost is the debt 
owed to one’s parents, for bringing them into life and nurturing them – hence the importance 
of the family. The only way in which to repay such debt is by becoming and being a good 
parent, conducting oneself in a way that continues to earn respect. The second is the obligation 
to one’s Lord, be that a daimyo if you are a serving samurai, the Emperor if a member of the 
Imperial  Court,  a  teacher  (sensei),  if  one  is  learning  or  one’s  employer  or  community,  if  a 
member of the lower social orders. Debt and obligation is found in almost everything and the 
Japanese strive to repay their debts and fulﬁl their obligations as fully and as honourably as 
possible. Failure on either count is shameful.

Clan and Family Dynamics
Where clans and family interactions are concerned, the relationship is based on strength and 
power,  be  that  political,  religious  or  military.  Every  family  and  clan  seeks  to  consolidate  its 
position and extend its reach and alliances are broken as easily as they are made if a better offer or 
prospect presents itself. In a highly stratiﬁed society, power and integrity (or at least a semblance 
of integrity), are the keys to success. Weakness is not tolerated and whilst the Heian period is 
certainly more relaxed than the feudal period in this regard, success and the power it brings are 
still central to the politics of the era.

Marriage
Marriage in Heian Japan is rarely about love and frequently about securing position, status and 
power. Marriages are used to seal alliances and demonstrate respect. Romantic notions, whilst 
they play a huge part in the songs, poems and stories of the time, are normally divorced from the 
institution of marriage. If a husband and wife love each other then it is a bonus; as long as the 
wife respects and obeys the husband – just as Izanami did with Izanagi – and bears him strong 
and healthy children, then the marriage is considered a good one. All marriages are arranged by 
parents or by Lords. Permission to marry is dependent on the will of either and how beneﬁcial, in 
the long run, the union will be. Once granted the ceremony is highly reverential and conducted 
at either a Shinto shrine or Buddhist temple with the bride shedding her white kimono to reveal 
a red one beneath, representing her rebirth into a new family.

All brides bear a dowry, which must be returned to her family if the marriage fails or the husband 
is found to be negligent in caring for the wife – such as failing to provide her with a standard of 
living suitable to her station.

Just as marriages are arranged by others, so can divorce be commanded. A daimyo can order 
a samurai to divorce his wife if circumstances dictate it is the most honourable or efﬁcacious 
course to take. Likewise, the parents of the husband can arrange a divorce in their son’s name 
if the wife is proving to be undutiful or unsuitable.

From Youth to Retirement
Childhood is considered to last from birth until the age of 16, when the child attains adulthood. 
He  is  allowed  to  marry,  to  serve  and  to  ﬁght,  although  such  things  may  happen  earlier  if 
circumstances dictate. Between 20 and 40 a man is considered to be in middle age and by 41, 
ready to retire if he has not attained an ofﬁce that requires his continuation. It is common for 
Ryomin men of 41 and older to retire to the priesthood or ascend to Inkyo, as it is known, 
retiring from active life, although it is not a requirement.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

25

Death
If one dies honourably, his soul and memory will be revered as a kami of the family; alternatively, 
if the deceased is of particularly high standing, a minor kami with a shrine erected in dedication. 
Shinto priests have no truck with death and so all death rites and burials are administered by 
Buddhist priests. Once the shackles of mortality have been discarded, Shinto reverence takes 
over, since the soul is now pure.

Dying with dishonour is to be denied the passage into the afterlife of Heaven and the shamed 
dead can expect no reverence. The spirit of the shamed deceased does not become a kami but 
a ghost or kwaidan, an ‘unquiet spirit’. Kwaidan might haunt those who brought shame upon 
them or wander the earth seeking atonement – a last chance of regaining honour and gaining 
peaceful rest.

Courtesy and Manners

Courtesy is everything to the Heian Japanese, and manners, the way in which, and when, things 
are  done,  are  of  huge  importance.  From  simple  things,  such  as  the  removal  of  shoes  before 
entering  a  residence,  through  to  bowing  in  the  correct  way,  to  the  correct  depth  and  for  an 
appropriate  time  according  to  the  rank  of  the  person  being  bowed  to,  all  are  of  the  utmost 
import and consequence. The Japanese believe that courtesy and manners are what set them 
above beasts and barbarians and are thus the marks of civilisation and culture. Since the Heian 
period  was  a  time  of  high  cultural  development,  it  is  here  that  courtesy  and  manners  were 
developed into the institutions that have made Japan remarkable ever since.

The Bow
The standard greeting in Japan is the bow, with the depth and duration of the bow reﬂecting the 
status of the person being greeted. For social equals this can be a brief bow from the shoulders 
but when greeting a superior, a long, dutiful bow is expected. Prostration is expected before one’s 
Lord, such as a daimyo or when attending the Imperial Court. However members of the Senmin 
caste are usually expected to prostrate before high-ranking samurai and members of the buke or 
kuge classes.

In game terms it is not normally required for characters to make any Skill Test when making a 
greeting but if the situation is particularly delicate or grave the Games Master should call for a 
Courtesy test. If the roll is failed, then the character has not quite presented himself as formally 
as he should and this may be reﬂected in the superior’s tone or mood but no other ill-effects 
should be forthcoming. If the Courtesy test is fumbled, then the character has shown disrespect 
by not bowing low enough or for long enough and he loses a point of On.

Address
Modes  of  address  and  conversation  are  highly  important  and  extremely  complex.  Between 
equals, colloquialisms are ﬁne but in other situations the way someone speaks and the words 
used are of the utmost importance since they reinforce the social hierarchy and conﬁrm both 
respect and deference. It is usual for those of inferior status only to speak when given permission 
to do so and the expectation is a clear, concise answer with no obfuscation. When a daimyo or 
high ranking magistrate gives an order or ruling, he does not want it questioned. If a character 
does so, it infers disrespect and immediately results in a rebuke and a loss of 1D2 On.

Even  when  allowed  to  speak  freely,  characters  must  use  the  correct  grammatical  forms, 
acknowledging their own position and that of their superior. This means that characters need 

26
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

to adopt a neutral or inferior tone and use of language, to avoid inferring their own superiority. 
Lapses and transgressions are likely to be overlooked in a relaxed situation but in formal social 
situations such lapses will be taken poorly. Again, Courtesy tests may be called for with a 1D2 
On loss if the roll is fumbled.

When using someone’s name, the sufﬁx –san is common. The sufﬁx –sama is used where great 
courtesy is required and the superior position of the other party needs to be reinforced. 
Footwear
The Japanese revere cleanliness and footwear is always removed before entering a residence – 
even  the  humblest  of  hovels. This  ensures  the  tatami  mats  and  wooden  ﬂoors  of  a  building 
remain  unsoiled  and  are  not  damaged.  Servants  look  after  deposited  footwear  and  if  one  is 
required to walk outside without having the opportunity to don one’s geta (the wooden platform 
clogs worn by most Ryomin and higher ranking Senmin), then either socks or a spare pair of 
geta are generally provided.

Weapons
Tachi, katana and larger weapons must be surrendered to servants before entering just about 
every private residence. Failing to comply with this courtesy, even when stepping into the home 
of an enemy, immediately incurs a loss of 1D3 On. Weapons are stored in racks until the visitor 
is leaving, when they are returned. If a character wears a dai-sho, then the wakazashi can be 
retained but it is a common courtesy to remove the weapon from the sash and place it to one 
side.

Only members of the Ryomin caste are permitted to wear the dai-sho. When the sword is not 
meant for use, it is worn through the sash of the kimono with the blade pointing towards the 
ground. This signals peace and makes to difﬁcult to make an iajutsu draw with the weapon in 
this position. When a character means business, then the sword is worn with the blade facing 
upwards, permitting a swift draw; visibly switching the position of the blade, from ground-facing 
to up, a subtle move, is considered a sign of a challenge or hostility

The Dai Sho
One of the traditional marks and privileges of the samurai class is the wearing of the dai sho – 
the katana and wakazashi. In reality the dai sho was a much later development than the Heian 
period. In Heian Japan the sword of choice for most samurai was the tachi, worn on its own and 
swung at the hip from a cord rather than worn tucked through the obi or belt sash, as is the case 
with the dai sho. However, given the iconic nature of the dai sho it is perfectly permissible for 
Heian samurai (and only samurai) to adopt its use, despite the anachronism.

Other  signs  of  hostility  include  using  the  thumb  to  nudge  the  sword  forward  slightly  in  its 
scabbard, ‘breaking’ its seal, as it were. Making a deliberate reach across the body for the hilt 
is another, more overt signal of aggression. Characters signalling hostile intentions need to be 
conﬁdent enough to carry the matter through, especially if they are samurai. Backing down is to 
lose face, resulting in a loss of 1D2 On (possibly more, depending on the situation).

Weapons such as polearms, like the naginata and yari, are always carried with the point towards 
the ground and about a metre in front of the body, when being carried on the road.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

27

Language and Literacy
Emperor  Kammu,  at  the  beginning  of  the  Heian  period,  encouraged  education  and  the 
development of literacy. Whilst this applied mostly to the Ryomin, the Senmin also beneﬁted 
and most people are capable of reading and writing. It is during the Heian period that Japan 
develops its own alphabet, the kana, which is not reliant on the Chinese alphabet used in earlier 
periods.

There are three alphabets, all consisting of ideograms, of differing complexity and for differing 
purposes:
Katakana is the most basic alphabet and the one most social classes understand and use for 
common  written  communication  (such  as  signs,  informal  letters  and  so  on).  It  is  a  highly 
simpliﬁed form of kanji.

Hiragana  is  a  further  development  of  kanji  and  used  in  formal  documents  and  for  when  a 
particular kana is not known. Most Buke and Kuge use hiragana in their standard correspondence.

Kanji is the alphabet of the Imperial Court and taught to all those who must prepare ofﬁcial, 
legal and administrative documentation; it is also the language of poetry and literature. As much 
an artwork as an alphabet, kanji is made up of many kana, which equate to syllables and convey 
not just sounds but also emotional inﬂections.

Characters who understand kanji will also be able to read katakana and hiragana as a matter of 
course. Those who understand only katakana and hiragana may attempt to read kanji at –40% 
to their Language (Hiragana) score. Those who understand only katakana understand hiragana 
at –40% to their Language (Katakana) score and kanji at –60%.

Government
Japan has had a well-structured national and regional government system for many, many years. 
First based on Chinese models, with heavy elements of Confucianism, by the time of the Heain 
period many of these older institutions have been jettisoned in favour of agencies better reﬂecting 
the consolidation of supreme power in the divinity of the Emperor. In Heian Japan almost every 
position in the inﬂuential government ministries are held by members, friends or allies of the 
Fujiwara clan, meaning that Japan is effectively a civil dictatorship.

The Emperor and Regency
The head of the state and considered a being of divine descent from the kami, is the Emperor, 
who either holds power in name and is controlled by a regent or wields power directly, guided 
by regency advice and counsel. The Emperor can make laws, change laws and holds effective 
command across the entire fabric of Japanese life. This exertion of power is kept in check by only 
two things: the will of the Regent, who is always a member of the Fujiwara clan and the age of 
the Emperor. In reality, most law is made by the Great Department of State and ratiﬁed by the 
Emperor and Regent but the Emperor’s word, in theory, is law and being divine, considered to 
be infallible.

The Great Council of State
The  Great  Council  is  headed  by  the  Daijo Daijin  (prime  minister)  who  is  appointed  by  the 
Regent in the Emperor’s name. The Daijo Daijin holds responsibility for preparing law for the 
Emperor’s ratiﬁcation and is in charge of appointing the members of the Council of State and 
the  provincial  governors  who  administrate  at  a  local  level  on  the  Emperor’s  behalf. This  is  a 
key position, with its holder generally being viewed as the next Regent, once the post becomes 

28
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

available.Also within the Great Council of State are the four ministers of the Dainagon who, 
supported by three lesser ministers, the Shonagon, who, together, provide guiding counsel to the 
Great Council, the Regent and the Emperor.

The Department of State
Known as the Daijo Kan, the Department of State conducts the regular business of Japan and 
is divided into two branches: the Sadaijin or Minister of the Left and Udaijin, the Minister of 
the Right.

The Minister of the Left appoints and administrates several other ministries. The Ministry of 
the Centre, Nakatsukasa-sho, is the clearing house for all information coming from the ministries 
before it is conveyed to the Emperor. Thus, the Ministry of the Centre is the effective heart of 
Japanese government, party to all that happens and able to prepare information ﬂowing in either 
direction, in a light that best serves whatever agendas have to be served. The Ministry of Ceremony, 
Shikibu-sho, determines the constitution of the staff serving the Imperial Household and dictates 
the precedence enjoyed by courtiers at ofﬁcial ceremonies and engagements. For those seeking 
social advancement, friends in the Ministry of Ceremony are essential. The  Ministry of Civil 
Affairs, the Jibu-sho, is in charge of ambassadorial appointments and affairs. It also holds power 
for legitimising clan status and names, making it a ministry of great interest to the power-hungry 
families of the provinces. Finally, the Ministry of People’s Affairs, Minbu-sho, is responsible for all 
matters pertaining to the people, including the taking of the census and operating public works 
requirements (building roads, effecting repairs to public buildings and so forth). The ministry 
is in charge of gathering labour to meet public needs, effectively demanding labour as a tax and 
in return, can grant property rights or shoen, to those who provide whatever labour is needed. 
The Ministry of People’s Affairs also controls the ﬂow of money through the other departments, 
effectively acting as the exchequer. 

The  Minister  of  the  Right.  The  Minister  of  the  Right  has  direct  responsibility  for  four 
ministries. The Ministry of Military Affairs or Hyobu-sho, co-ordinates all calls to the families 
and clans when the Imperial Court requires military service and the assembling of an army. The 
Ministry of Justice, the Gyobu-sho enforces the legal process, through the devising of punishments 
and ﬁne tariffs, as outlined in Crime and Punishment, below. The Ministry of the Treasury, the 
Okura-sho is in charge of tax collection but cannot appoint tax collectors or set tax levies. The 
Treasury  also  has  auditing  rights  over  all  government  institutions  and  is  allowed  to  set  trade 
tariffs and prices. Finally, the Ministry of the Imperial Household, the Kunai-sho, looks after those 
who provide refreshments and catering to the Imperial Court and its ofﬁcials. It administrates 
the Imperial rice ﬁelds, orchards and grain farms. 

The Provincial Governors
Appointed  by  the  Daijo  Daijin  of  the  Great  Council,  the  provincial  governors  represent  the 
Emperor across Japan and are responsible for ensuring tax revenues are collected. They have no 
power over the families and clans in terms of how estates, towns and villages are run but are still 
powerful and inﬂuential ﬁgures nonetheless. Offending a provincial governor is to risk offending 
the Emperor (or more important, the Prime Minister and the Regent) and because there is a clear 
demarcation between the responsibilities of land owners and the government, disputes are rare, 
although protests made when the levies change and the effects are felt directly on clan purses.

Crime and Punishment

The  Japanese  legal  system,  administered  by  the  Gyobu-sho  of  the  Ministry  of  the  Right,  is 
based  on  personal  confession;  no  punishment  can  be  meted  out  or  guilt  assigned,  without 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

29

Capital Crimes
•	 Adultery
•	 Arson
•	 Burglary
•	 Forgery
•	 Murder without Just Cause
•	 Patricide
•	 Practicing Sorcery
•	 Rape
•	 Robbery
•	 Treason against the Emperor. Treason is especially heinous. It means the death not only of 
the perpetrator but also his family, including servants, children, wife and parents, and the 
banishment of his grandparents. All family property is conﬁscated.

one. Therefore all efforts are taken to capture criminals alive, so that the hangan or magistrate, 
can  question  them  to  obtain  a  confession. This  usually  involves  torture,  including  beatings, 
burnings, ﬂayings, breakings, boilings, stretchings and all manner of gruesomeness designed to 
extract a confession and thereby establish guilt. Naturally such treatments are reserved for the 
lower orders and ronin; samurai and above are given the opportunity to commit seppuku, if the 
crime warrants it or make ﬁnancial restitution to the injured party.

A prisoner who dies in custody before making a confession is deemed to be innocent. His family 
is paid the equivalent of half a year’s income from the daimyo’s coffers. If the prisoner proves he 
is innocent or is proved innocent in some other way, then he and his family receive a month’s 
income. Family testament counts for nothing towards the proof of innocence and no hangan 
will hear family petitions no matter how heartfelt or truthful. The burden of innocence lies in 
the confession and that rests with the prisoner.

The punishment for capital crimes depends on status. Samurai and above are expected to commit 
seppuku. Lower orders are executed according to the nature of their crime. Arsonists (and arson 
is a dreadful crime in a society where dwellings are made from wood and paper) are burned alive. 
Others are cruciﬁed, with their body being stabbed by spears wielded by the very lowest of the 
social orders. Once done, the victim’s head is severed and posted in a public place as a warning 
and the body is given to samurai to use for bow and sword practice.

In  some  circumstances  the  victim  might  be  given  to  the  samurai  alive  for  such  practice; 
condemned criminals are considered excellent for the testing of new blades and several might be 
stood in a line so that the samurai can test how many bodies he can severe in a single cut.

Lesser crimes are punishable through ﬁnes, public humiliation – such as being held in stocks, 
handcuffed for lengthy periods whilst made to carry-out day to day tasks or paraded through 
the streets naked – and conﬁscation of property, depending on the crime. Imprisonment is a 
short-term measure, although samurai and buke might be held under house arrest for a period, 

30
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

whilst charges against them are assessed. All punishments are meted by the hangan but may be 
carried out by samurai serving the daimyo or kenin servants. Samurai can be stripped of their 
status and reduced to heimin. Those suffering this fate are effectively disowned by the family 
or clan and if they do not commit seppuku and mitigate the crime, become ronin, losing all 
possessions and status.

Killing – Kiri-sute-gomen

This is the right of a samurai to cut-down any common person with complete impunity. Much 
is  made  of  this  right  but  it  was  far  more  common  in  the  feudal  (speciﬁcally  the Tokugawa) 
period, when military power was at its height. In Heian Japan, samurai do not enjoy this right. A 
member of the peasantry (the Heimin class) failing to honour a samurai can be berated and even 
punished, depending on the transgression and will certainly lose On but death is still considered 
murder and the aggrieved family can petition the daimyo for the samurai to be punished in 
some way.

Any  samurai  who  kills  in  this  way  (i.e.  not  in  self  defence)  will  be  held  accountable  for  his 
actions.  In  such  instances,  the  character  must  make  an  Opposed  On  roll  against  that  of  the 
daimyo or magistrate, with the On of the person he has slain used as a penalty against his own 
On. If the character fails to provide an adequate justiﬁcation, he suffers a loss of On equal to one 
third of the On score of the person he has killed and is likely to face other punishments too, such 
as making a ﬁnancial donation to a temple, the victim’s family or the daimyo’s coffers, depending 
on the circumstances.

Seppuku

Another famous – or infamous – Japanese ritual is that of seppuku, ritual suicide by cutting open 
the belly. There are several reasons why someone would commit seppuku:
•	 To preserve personal honour – avoiding capture by an enemy, ﬁnding oneself in impossible 

circumstances and so forth.

•	 To atone for dishonour – where the shame incurred is so great, personal reputation cannot 

hope to be recovered.

•	

In  the  face  of  conﬂicting  interests  –  where  a  person  knows  that  what  they  have  been 
commanded to do is wrong or will lead to great shame if carried out.

•	 To demonstrate absolute loyalty to a Lord – though this is exceedingly rare.
•	 Punishment – samurai can be ordered to commit seppuku if they are found guilty of a 

crime that demands an exemplary punishment.

In the Heian period the ﬁrst of the above reasons was the primary reason for committing seppuku 
and usually on the battleﬁeld. Seppuku for atoning for dishonour began during the 10th Century 
and did not become common amongst the buke until the Tokugawa period in the 16th and 17th 
Centuries.

Only samurai and above are permitted to commit seppuku as a punishment. Lower classes are 
simply executed. The act is highly ritualised and involves a certain degree of preparation. First, 
the person committing seppuku spends a period in contemplation and meditation. This might 
also involve writing or dictating a letter outlining the reasons for the sacriﬁce. Next, the area is 
prepared; clean and private, with a small wooden table holding a tanto or other short-bladed 
knife, placed in front of where the person will kneel.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

31

The person then kneels, with his kimono opened. An assistant, known as the kaishakunin, stands 
behind the victim with a katana drawn. The kaishakunin puriﬁes the blade with water, which 
also helps lubricate it. The victim then commits the act: three cuts to the belly with the knife. 
The knife is drawn from left to right across the belly for the ﬁrst cut, then upwards from the 
centre of the ﬁrst cut towards the breastbone. The third and ﬁnal cut is made parallel to the ﬁrst. 
When the third cut has been made, the kaishakunin sweeps down with his katana, beheading 
the victim in a single blow.

Characters committing seppuku or wanting to, should have very good reason for doing so and 
the moment should be treated with great reverence. For each cut, the character must make a 
Persistence test. If the roll succeeds, then the cut has been made successfully. If the test is a critical 
success, the character can ignore the Persistence penalty for the second cut. If the test is failed, 
then the character lacks the nerve to continue with the cut. If a kaishakunin present, he strikes 
regardless and the character dies with shame upon his name.

For  the  second  and  third  cuts,  the  character  makes  a  Persistence  test  again  but  this  time  at 
a  cumulative  –20%  penalty,  with  the  results  as  above.  On  the  third  cut,  the  kaishakunin,  if 
present, conducts the beheading.

Characters who fail seppuku and have not been beheaded because a kaishakunin is not present, 
immediately lose half their On and must live with the shame and inner anguish their failure 
brings about. Some will try again; others will leave service and become ronin, unable to reconcile 
their anguish and most likely seek-out death in some other way, welcoming it.

Standards of Living

Naturally enough, standards of living vary considerably across Japan and are based on caste and 
social class. At the lower end of the social scale the peasants eke an existence in whatever ways 
they can, paying taxes on their meagre land plots and a regular tribute to the daimyo of their 
area. For samurai, a regular stipend is paid to them as their retainer and those who have served 
well may even be given their own property by their daimyo, which they are expected to maintain 
and police. Amongst the aristocracy, minor and major, standards of living are much higher with 
incomes sufﬁcient to maintain their families and holdings.

The Japanese are, however, a naturally frugal people. Waste is very uncommon, mainly because 
in a country that has little arable land, every little counts. If a rice crop fails, all go hungry, not 
just the peasants and famines throughout the Heian period are not uncommon.

Currency
Amongst the lower classes, the Senmin, barter is common. Coinage actually developed after the 
Heian period, borrowing its system from mainland China but in Samurai of Legend, it has been 
brought forward. The currency is based on two concepts: the mon, represented by the copper piece 
and the koku, represented by the gold piece. The mon is the minimum amount needed for daily 
living. A mon buys a bowl of rice and a cup of tea or sake. A koku represents the amount of rice 
needed to support one person for one year or one gold piece.

Most daily transactions are therefore conducted using the copper mon. Larger transactions are 
conducted in silver coins, called gin. Gin are the preserve of the upper classes, rarely seen beyond 
the exchequers of the daimyo and wealthy courtiers.

32
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Coinage Values
180 mon (copper) = 1 gin (silver)
360 mon  = 2 gin = 1 koku (gold)

Coins are minted by the Imperial Mint and carry the name, in kanji, of the current Emperor on 
one face and his mon (his heraldic device), on the other – hence the name given to copper coins. 
Coins have a square hole in the centre, allowing them to be strung on leather thongs, usually 100 
at a time. A mon is about 3cm in diameter and a gin is about 5cm. Koku are 6cm and usually 
kept wrapped in cloth or waxed paper. For very large sums of gold, bullion is minted, stamped 
and transported in specially built, heavily guarded coffers.

Diet

Rice and ﬁsh are the staples of the Japanese diet, supplemented by seasonable vegetables and 
fruits. Meat is rarely eaten, although game, when caught as part of a falconry hunt, is considered 
acceptable from time to time and may be served as part of a banquet or formal dinner. Beef is 
never eaten. Food is prepared simply, boiled, steamed or eaten raw. Frying is unknown in Heian 
Japan and is a technique that does not come into practice until quite late in Japan’s history.

The uses to which rice is put are astounding. It is served boiled or steamed in grains, stirred 
until it is sticky and moulded into balls and pressed into solid, starchy cakes. It is ground into 
ﬂour (although bread is unknown) and of course, fermented to make sake, which is served 
warm.

Tea
Tea (Cha), a relatively recent import from China, is also drunk and during the Heian period 
complex rituals (Cha no Yu or Tea Ceremony) are developed around the brewing and serving 
of it. Cha no Yu is a social ritual invested with all the reverence of a religious service and is 
conducted in a Tea House built for the occasion. The aim is to purify the mind, body and soul, 
emerging from the experience refreshed and clear-headed.

Conducting  a  Cha  no  Yu  is  done  with  the  Lore  (Tea  Ceremony)  skill.  If  the  test  is  critically 
successful,  all  participants  gain  a  point  of  On  and  a  Magic  Point,  such  has  been  the  aesthetic 
perfection of the host’s endeavours. There are no penalties for a failure, although a fumble means 
that the reverence of the ritual has not been observed correctly and the host loses a point of On.

The Japanese Calendar and Time

The Japanese calendar is a complex combination based on a 60 year cycle, in which the years 
are named for elements and animals rather than being given a numerical notation. The ﬁrst part 
of the notation, representing the elements, is known as the 10 trunks. Five trunks represent the 
elder brother of each element and the second ﬁve, the younger brother. The ﬁve elements are 
Earth, Fire, Metal, Water and Wood; thus, the ﬁrst trunks are the Elder Borther of Earth, the 
Elder Brother or Fire and so forth and the second trunks are the same elements preﬁxed with 
‘Young Brother’.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

33

The Japanese Elements (Trunks)
Element
Earth
Fire
Metal
Water
Wood

Japanese Name
Tsuchi
Hi
Ka
Mizu
Ki

Elder Trunk
Tsuchi-no-e
Hi-no-e
Ka-no-e
Mzu-no-e
Ki-no-e

Younger Trunk
Tsuchi-no-to
Hi-no-to
Ka-no-to
Mzu-no-to
Ki-no-to

These 10 trunks combine with 12 twigs to form the year structure. The twigs are the 12 animals 
of the Chinese zodiac and are also used to denote hours of the day.

The Japanese Zodiacal Signs (Twigs)
Zodiacal Sign
Boar
Cockerel
Dog
Dragon
Goat
Hare
Horse
Monkey
Ox
Rat
Serpent
Tiger

Japanese Name
I
Tori
Inu
Tatsu
Hitsuji
U
Ma
Saru
Ushi
Ne
Mi
Tora

Thus, a year is expressed as Mzu-no-to-Tori (Year of the Cockerel, Young Brother of Water) 
and the next is. Mzu-no-e-Tori (Year of the Cockerel, Elder Brother of Water).

34
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Hours of the Day
An hour is toki and the hourly cycle uses the signs of the zodiac once more but this time split 
into ‘lesser’ (Sho-X-no-Toki) and ‘greater’ (Sei-X-no-Toki) hours. With twelve signs and the two 
preﬁxes, one arrives at a 24 hour clock.

Japanese Hours (Toki)
Hour
Midnight
1am
2am
3am
4am
5am
6am
7am
8am
9am
10am
11am
12pm
Hour
1pm
2pm
3pm
4pm
5pm
6pm
7pm
8pm
9pm
10pm
11pm

English Notation
Greater Hour of the Rat
Lesser Hour of the Ox
Greater Hour of the Ox
Lesser Hour of the Tiger
Greater Hour of the Tiger
Lesser Hour of the Hare
Greater Hour of the Hare
Lesser Hour of the Dragon
Greater Hour of the Dragon
Lesser Hour of the Serpent
Greater Hour of the Serpent
Lesser Hour of the Horse
Greater Hour of the Horse
English Notation
Lesser Hour of the Goat
Greater Hour of the Goat
Lesser Hour of the Monkey
Greater Hour of the Monkey
Lesser Hour of the Cockerel
Greater Hour of the Cockerel
Lesser Hour of the Dog
Greater Hour of the Dog
Lesser Hour of the Boar
Greater Hour of the Boar
Lesser Hour of the Rat

Japanese Notation
Sho-Ne-no-Toki
Sei-Ushi-no-Toki
Sho-Ushi-no-Toki
Sei-Tora-no-Toki
Sho-Tora-no-Toki
Sei-U-no-Toki
Sho-U-no-Toki
Sei-Tatsu-no-Toki
Sho-Tatsu-no-Toki
Sei-Mi-no-Toki
Sho-Mi-no-Toki
Sei-Ma-no-Toki
Sho-Ma-no-Toki
Japanese Notation
Sei-Hitsuji-no-Toki
Sho-Hitsuji-no-Toki
Sei-Saru-no-Toki
Sho-Saru-no-Toki
Sei-Tori-no-Toki
Sho-Tori-no-Toki
Sei-Inu-no-Toki
Sho-Inu-no-Toki
Sei-I-no-Toki
Sho-I-no-Toki
Sei-Ne-no-Toki

Traditionally, the Japanese do not have names for days but instead refer to the number of the 
day (‘the ﬁrst day of …’ However the ﬁrst and last days of each month are named: Tsuitachi and 
Misoka respectively. The last day of the year is known as O-Misoka (literally, Great Misoka).

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

35

Japanese Time Divisions
One Year: Toshi
10 Days: Shu
2 Hours: Toki
7.5 Minutes: Koku
30 Seconds: Fun
0.5 seconds: Byo (‘a moment’)

Weights and Measures

Whilst time is measured according to the 12 signs of the zodiac, weights, lengths and volume are 
measured roughly on a metric scale, as shown in the table below.

Weights and Measures
Japanese Measure
1 monme
1 kanme = 1000 monme

1 shaku
1 ken = 6 shaku
1 jo = 10 shaku
1 cho = 60 ken
1 ri = 36 cho

1 go
1 sho
1 koku

Western Equivalent
3.75 grams
3.75 kilos

30.3cm
1.8metres
3.03metres
109metres
3927.27metres

0.18litres
1.8litres
180litres

36
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

characters

This chapter describes the process of creating a Japanese character, including details on social 
background and professions and also includes new advanced skills.

Character Creation Checklist
•	 Follow steps One to Three of the Legend adventurer creation process. 
•	 For step Four, refer to sections below relating to clans, families and professions.
•	 For step Five, all characters have a Movement rate of 4 metres per Combat Action.
•	 Every Samurai of Legend adventurer begins with 3 Hero Points.
•	 Any age between 15 and 30 is permissible.
•	 Calculate the character’s On, using the Personal Starting On column appropriate to the 

character’s caste and class.

•	 For step Six, buy the adventurer’s starting equipment according to the money determined 
by cultural background and profession. Refer to the Equipment chapter beginning on 
page 66 for more information on Japanese equipment available.

•	 Step 7, determine if the character has any gifts or heirlooms.

A Note on Gender Roles
Japanese society has always favoured male roles above female. Men occupied almost all the key 
roles in the Imperial Court and female samurai were unheard of. Women were home-makers, 
artists, poets and entertainers but could still quite easily exert power in their own way, albeit 
indirectly.

If  you  are  planning  a  historically  accurate  Samurai  of  Legend  game,  then  the  social  divisions 
between male and female should be observed, including female deference to men as a matter of 
etiquette. However if you wish to bend the setting to allow a greater degree of equal opportunity, 
this is up to you!

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

37

Clans
•	 Ando 
•	 Fujiwara 
•	
Imebe 
•	
Jukodo 
•	 Maeda 
•	 Murata 
•	 Nomura 
•	 Otomo 
•	 Tokugawa

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

Chino

Genda

Inihara

Kume

Mimamoto

Nakatomi

Sarume

Tiara

Clans, Families and Alliances

The family and the clan are important concepts in Japanese society. In Heian Japan many of the 
families were either members of or afﬁliated with, one of the major clans, such as the Fujiwara, 
Minamoto  and  Taira  and  may  even  be  striving  to  establish  their  own  clan  either  through 
achieving improved status or currying favour with the Imperial Court and being honoured by 
the Emperor himself.

The table below provides an extensive but by no means exhaustive, list of clans and families 
and notes which families are allied with which clans. Families listed as Aspiring means that the 
family is actively attempting to form its own clan by attracting alliances with other families and/
or seeking greater glory and impressing the Imperial Court.

38
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

All the families listed are of the Ryomin caste and either Kuge or Buke classes. For simplicity 
it can be assumed that the three major clans – Fujiwara, Minamoto and Taira – have family 
extensions into the Imperial Family (although it was by no means this clear cut), whereas the 
remaining  clans  are  on  the  periphery  of  the  Imperial  Court.  Clan  rivalries  are  common  and 
whilst clan warfare did not truly begin until the Gempei Wars, feuds and skirmishes, especially 
over political and territorial differences, occurred throughout the Heian period.

Families
Allied Families
Abe
Abukara
Ajibana
Akamatsu
Akechi
Akita
Akutagawa
Amano
Anno
Anzai
Araki
Arakida
Arato
Arihyoshi
Asahi
Asahina
Asai
Eguchi
Ekiguchi
Enomoto
Etsuko
Fujishima
Fukuda
Fukunaka
Fukuoka
Fukusaku
Fukushima
Funaki
Fuse
Futabatei
Fuwa
Goto
Gushiken
Hagino
Hanabusa
Hino

Allied To
Kume
Chino
Ando
Taira
Taira
Chno
Kume
Jukodo
Taira
Sarume
Tokugawa
Ando
Minamoto
Taira
Maeda
Chino
Minamoto
Fujiwara
Murata
Nomura
Jukodo
Fujiwara
Taira
Fujiwara
Kume
Imebe
Imebe
Murata
Nakatomi
Nakatomi
Minamoto
Ijiri
Taira
Fujiwara
Fujiwara
Genda

Unallied Families
Akagi
Akatsuka
Akimoto
Amaya
Anami
Aoki
Aoyama
Arai
Arakawa
Aramaki
Arishima
Arita
Asari
Ashia
Baisotei
Bando
Bunya
Ebisawa
Egami
Endoso
Fuchida
Fugunaga
Fujimaki
Fukao
Genji
Godo
Hachirobei
Hagiwara
Hamaguchi
Hara
Haruguchi
Hasegawa
Hasekura
Hashimoto
Hatakeyama
Hayami

Aspiring Families
Adachi
Agawa
Aida
Aizawa
Amagawa
Asahara
Asanuma
Asuhara
Atshushi
Chishu
Choshi
Dainichi
Date
Deushi
Endo
Eto
Ezakiya
Funabashi
Funakoshi
Furukawa
Gensai
Hama
Hana
Hata
Hatakeda
Hatoyama
Hattori
Hayakawa
Hayuata
Higuchi
Hira
Hiraga
Hiratasuka
Hirayama
Hirose
Hiroyuki

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

39

Allied Families
Hiraoka
Hirase
Hiro
Hohki
Hojo
Honami
Honjo
Hoshino
Hotta
Ichiro
Ihara
Ii
Ikina
Imada
Ishikawa
Ishinomori
Isozaki
Itagaki
Itagaki
Ito
Itoh
Iwasa
Iwasaki
Iwata
Izumi
Jonouchi
Jumonji
Kagawa
Kamisaka
Kamo
Kanegawa
Kaneko
Kasahara
Kasai
Kashiwagi
Katayama
Kato
Katsu
Kawamata
Kawazu
Kazuyoshi
Kenkyusha
Ki

Allied To
Fujiwara
Maeda
Fujiwara
Otomo
Otomo
Ijiri
Kume
Nakatomi
Murata
Otomo
Taira
Minamoto
Maeda
Tokugawa
Taira
Minamoto
Taira
Ando
Murata
Minamoto
Taira
Imebe
Minamoto
Taira
Taira
Minamoto
Minamoto
Jukodo
Jukodo
Otomo
Sarume
Nakatomi
Taira
Minamoto
Jukodo
Fujiwara
Kume
Taira
Taira
Nomura
Minamoto
Fujiwara
Genda

40
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Unallied Families
Hayashi
Hayashida
Hayata
Hideaki
Higashikuni
Higashiyama
Higo
Hike
Hiraki
Hirano
Hirasi
Hirata
Hirota
Hirota
Hyata
Ibuka
Ichigawa
Ichihara
Ienari
Iida
Iida
Iijima
Iitaka
Imagawa
Imoo
Ina
Ino
Irie
Isobe
Isoda
Ito
Itokawa
Kanai
Karamorita
Kase
Kataoka
Katsukawa
Katsumata
Katsushika
Kido
Kijmuta
Kikui
Kimura

Aspiring Families
Hisamatsu
Hishikawa
Hokusai
Horiuchi
Hotate
Hyobanshi
Ibi
Ibu
Ichimonji
Ichiyusai
Idane
Iemochi
Iesada
Ikeda
Inokuma
Inoue
Inoue
Inukai
Iseya
Ishida
Ishiguro
Ishiguro
Ishihara
Ishimura
Ito
Iwahara
Iwaki
Iwakura
Kakutama
Kamachi
Kamio
Kanada
Kano
Katsura
Kawakami
Kawasaki
Kijimuta
Kikuchi
Kikugawa
Koiso
Kojima
Komon
Kondo

Allied Families
Kikkawa
Kikutake
Kimio
Kimiyama
Konoe
Kubota
Kurmochi
Kurohiko
Kurusu
Kusunoki
Kyubei
Marubeni
Masanobu
Masaoka
Mashita
Masudu
Masuno
Matsukata
Matsumura
Matsuo
Matsushina
Matsuzawa
Mayuzumi
Mihashi
Minabuchi
Miwa
Miyamoto
Murayama
Mushanaokoji
Mushashibo
Nagahama
Nagai
Nagano
Natsume
Nawabe
Nemoto
Noda
Nogi
Nomura
Odaka
Ogawa
Ozaki
Ozawa

Allied To
Taira
Minamoto
Ando
Minamoto
Genda
Imebe
Nomura
Minamoto
Genda
Fujiwara
Genda
Imebe
Inihara
Jukodo
Kume
Maeda
Minamoto
Minamoto
Genda
Fujiwara
Minamoto
Kume
Chino
Ando
Chino
Nomura
Sarume
Sarume
Otomo
Taira
Tokugawa
Inihara
Jukodo
Minamoto
Kume
Chino
Ando
Chino
Nomura
Sarume
Otomo
Genda
Fujiwara

Unallied Families
Kinugasa
Kitamura
Kobayashi
Kobi
Kon
Kono
Kono
Koruba
Koshin
Koshino
Kotoku
Kozu
Kudara
Kudo
Kuno
Kunomasu
Kuramochi
Kuramoto
Kurkawa
Kuroda
Kuroki
Kusonoki
Makino
Masoni
Matano
Matsuda
Matsumoto
Morioka
Moto
Munakata
Murase
Murkami
Muruyama
Namiki
Nanami
Narita
Ninomiya
Nishihara
Nishimoto
Nishimura
Nishio
Okada
Okanaya

Aspiring Families
Konoe
Koyama
Kuga
Kunda
Makiguchi
Makuda
Marusa
Maruya
Maruyama
Matokai
Matsuki
Matsura
Matsushita
Minatoya
Minobe
Mitsubishi
Mitsuwa
Mitsuya
Miyagi
Miyazaki
Morimoto
Morita
Motoori
Motoyoshi
Munkata
Murakami
Muto
Nonomura
Nozaki
Nozara
Oe
Ogata
Ohira
Okano
Okasawa
Okazawaya
Okimasa
Okimoto
Okui
Omura
Onohara
Saito
Saji

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

41

Allied Families
Saionji
Sakakibara
Sakoda
Sakurai
Santo
Sasakawa
Sawamatsu
Segawa
Sekine
Senmatsu
Seo
Seto
Shibaguchi
Shibanuma
Shiroyama
Siagyo
Soga
Sonoda
Sugita
Sugitani
Takagi
Takara
Takarabe
Takasu
Takewaki
Takizawa
Tamura
Taniguchi
Tokuda
Tomimoto
Tomori
Tono
Torii
Toyoda
Tsubaki
Tsubouchi
Tsuchie
Tsukahara
Tsukatani
Tsukehara
Tsunoda
Tsutaya
Tsutomu

Allied To
Maeda
Fujiwara
Taira
Tokugawa
Ando
Chino
Fujiwara
Genda
Imebe
Inihara
Jukodo
Kume
Maeda
Minamoto
Tokugawa
Ando
Chino
Minamoto
Fujiwara
Minamoto
Tokugawa
Ando
Chino
Fujiwara
Taira
Taira
Ando
Maeda
Kume
Chino
Ando
Chino
Nomura
Sarume
Otomo
Taira
Tokugawa
Ando
Chino
Taira
Tokugawa
Ando
Chino

42
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Unallied Families
Okawa
Okazaki
Okubo
Okuda
Omori
Ono
Osagawa
Ota
Otani
Otomo
Otsu
Ozu
Royama
Ryusaki
Shigeki
Shigemitsu
Shimamura
Shimaoka
Shimizu
Shimura
Shinozaki
Shinozuka
Shirai
Shirane
Shirasu
Shiratori
Shizuma
Shoda
Taka
Takabe
Takada
Takahashi
Takakusaki
Takamura
Takano
Takasugi
Takecare
Takeda
Takemago
Takemitsu
Takeshita
Takeuchi
Takishida

Aspiring Families
Sakai
Sakata
Saotome
Saromi
Sasada
Satoh
Satoya
Sen
Shibata
Shidehara
Shige
Shigi
Shimanouchi
Shimohira
Takahama
Takaoka
Takashi
Takashita
Takekawa
Taku
Takudo
Tamuro
Tani
Tashiro
Tatenaka
Tatsuno
Tendo
Teshigahara
Tsukada
Tsukioka
Tsumemasa
Tsuruya
Uchida
Ueda
Uematsu
Uetake
Usami
Utagawa
Watabe
Yagi
Yakuta
Yamabe
Yamagata

Aspiring Families
Yamamoto
Yamana
Yamato
Yanagimachi
Yokokawa
Yokoyama
Yonemura
Yosano
Yoshida
Yoshikawa
Yoshizaki

Allied Families
Ueda
Ukiyo
Urogataya
Utsumi
Watari
Watanabe
Yabuki
Yamaguchi
Yamanaka
Yamanouchi
Yamanoue
Yamaoka
Yanagi
Yanagisawa
Yasuda
Yasukawa
Yoemon
Yoshinobu
Yuhara

Allied To
Minamoto
Minamoto
Ando
Chino
Fujiwara
Genda
Imebe
Taira
Minamoto
Maeda
Maeda
Minamoto
Murata
Nakatomi
Nomura
Sarume
Fujiwara
Taira
Tokugawa

Unallied Families
Takishita
Tanaka
Tanaka
Tansho
Tanuma
Tatsuya
Terada
Terakado
Torisei
Toru
Toyota
Tsujimoto
Tsurimi
Uda
Uehara
Ueshima
Ui
Umari
Umeki

Castes

Japan has always been a caste-based society; that is, people divided into social stations reﬂecting 
their background and upbringing. Essentially Heian Japan is divided into two sets of people, 
each with further internal divisions. The upper caste is the Ryomin, or ‘Good Citizens’ and the 
lower caste the Senmin or ‘Low Citizens’. The caste one is born into dictates privileges one can 
expect, levels of respect (or lack of), jobs and positions one could (and should) hold and likely 
income. In the Heian period the caste system is far less structured than during the feudal period 
and mobility between castes is quite possible, for those with the will to rise above their birth 
station.

Every character in Samurai of Legend belongs to either the Ryomin or the Senmin caste and then 
to one of the social classes within the caste. Caste and class function as the Cultural Background 
for standard Legend, with characters gaining skills according to their caste and social class.

Rymin Caste
The classes within the ‘Good Citizens’ are, in order of importance:

The Imperial Court
Emperor – Emperors can be of any age. If too young to exercise power, a Regent is appointed 
by the Great Council of State, although it is now common practice for a Fujiwara Regent to be 
appointed regardless of age.

Crown  Princes  –  Male  heirs  eligible  to  ascend  to  the  Imperial Throne,  Crown  Princes,  are 
named by the Emperor or his Regent; thus it is not an automatic right and depends very much 
on lineage and background.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

43

Retired Emperors – known either as Dajo-ko or Dajo-hoo, if they have entered the priesthood. 
After  1072  the  Insei  or  Cloistered  Emperor,  system  comes  back  into  use,  whereby  a  retired 
Emperor continues to wield executive power from behind the scenes.

The Imperial Family – all those with a direct familial relationship to the Emperor.

Nobles of Court – The Kuge. This includes all senior advisers, headed by the Regent and for most 
of the Heian period is dominated by the Fujiwara clan. Regents are of two types; Sessho advise 
child Emperors and the Empress, whilst Kampaku act as senior advisers to adult Emperors.

The Buke
The Buke are the nobles outside the Imperial Court, landowners and clan heads.

Daimyo – The leaders of clans and families with shoen (land and property).

Samurai – The word samurai means ‘to serve’ and strictly, it denotes anyone who offers service to 
a lord or noble, be it an adviser or warrior. During the Heian period samurai were, by and large, 
warriors who had proved themselves in battle and had dedicated themselves to the service of a 
particular lord. Thus, there are different levels of status within the samurai class, depending on 
service, experience, personal wealth and usefulness to the daimyo. Samurai without a lord, ronin, 
experience mixed fates. Whilst a lordless samurai is expected to incur a certain amount of shame, 
many were happy to wander, experiencing freedom outside the strictures of the clan.

Senmin Caste
Low Citizens are those outside the aristocracy and comprise the rank and ﬁle of Japan.

Imperial Servants – Ryoko. Imperial Court bureaucrats and high-ranking household servants, 
including guards of the Imperial Household.

Public Servants – Kanko. Bureaucrats and servants of the government ministries, serving in 
ofﬁcial capacities in the capital and elsewhere.

Family Servants – Kenin. Lesser advisers, bureaucrats and servants to Buke families

Heimin – This is a catch-all term referring to the peasantry (hyakusho) who offered their lands to 
a Daimyo; artisans, craftsmen, merchants, farmers and so forth. Heimin warriors, typically drawn 
from the peasantry, are known as Ashigaru. Merchants and traders do not occupy especially high 
status in Japanese society. The pursuit of proﬁt was not considered a particularly honourable way 
of living and whilst some merchants (Akindo) could become wealthy, they could never become 
Ryomin. It was common for merchants to act as moneylenders and since the borrowing of anything 
in Japanese society incurs debt, the popularity of merchants is never very high.

The Priesthood
In the Heian period the priesthood occupies its own social class. Most priests are Buddhists and 
attached to a particular temple. Shinto has no formal structure of clergy and thus no formal 

44
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

priesthood, although many Ryomin and Senmin acted in such a capacity. Priests are drawn from 
both castes and previous caste divisions are retained, to a degree, within the temple structure. 
However the leaders of the temples, the abbots, are treated as Ryomin, whatever their original 
station in life.

The Priesthood is discussed in greater depth in the Religion chapter.

Status and Culture Background

Caste

Class

Ryomin Imperial 

Family

Caste and Class Skills
Basic
Courtesy +10%
Inﬂuence +10%
Persistence +10%

Advanced
Language 
(Japanese) +50%
Lore (Regional)

Pick Two +5%
Evaluate, Evade, 
Perception, Ride

Pick Two +15%
1H Sword, 2H 
Sword, Dagger, 
Rapier, Shield

Pick Two
Calligraphy*
Craft
Dance
Language
Lore
Play Instrument
Shiphandling

Kuge

Courtesy +10%
Inﬂuence +10%
Persistence +10%

Language 
(Japanese) +50%
Lore (Regional)

Pick Two +5%
Evaluate, Evade, 
Perception, Ride

Pick Two +15%
1H Sword, 2H 
Sword, Dagger, 
Rapier, Shield

Pick Two
Calligraphy*
Craft
Dance
Language
Lore
Play Instrument
Shiphandling

Professions

Personal 
Starting On

70+POW+CHA

60+POW+CHA

Bushi (Warrior)
Daishonin 
(Scribe)
Gaikoukan 
(Diplomat)
Gakusha 
(Scholar)
Isha (Herbalists 
and Healers)
Reijin (Bard)
So and Bozu 
(Buddhist 
Priest and 
Monk)
Teishin 
(Courtier)
Youjutsusha 
(Sorcerer)
Bushi (Warrior)
Daishonin 
(Scribe)
Gaikoukan 
(Diplomat)
Gakusha 
(Scholar)
Isha (Herbalists 
and Healers)
Kannushi 
(Shinto Priest)
So and Bozu 
(Buddhist 
Priest and 
Monk)
Sohei (Warrior 
Monk)
Togi (Acrobat/
Entertainer)
Youjutsusha 
(Sorcerer)

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

45

Caste

Class

Buke

Caste and Class Skills
Basic
Courtesy +10%
Inﬂuence +10%
Persistence +10%

Advanced
Language 
(Japanese) +50%
Lore (Regional)

Pick Two +5%
Evaluate, Evade, 
Perception, Ride

Pick Two +15%
Bow
1H Sword, 2H 
Sword, Dagger, 
Polearm

Pick Two
Calligraphy*
Craft
Dance
Language
Lore
Play Instrument
Shiphandling

Samurai Courtesy +10%
Inﬂuence +10%
Persistence +10%
1H Sword +10%
Ride +10%

Pick One +10%
Evaluate, Evade, 
Perception
Bow
2H Sword, 
Dagger, Polearm

Language 
(Japanese) +50%
Lore (Regional)

Pick Two
Calligraphy*
Craft
Dance
Language
Lore
Play Instrument
Shiphandling

Professions

Personal 
Starting On

50+POW+CHA

40+POW+CHA

Bushi (Warrior)
Daishonin 
(Scribe)
Gaikoukan 
(Diplomat)
Gakusha 
(Scholar)
Hangan 
(Magistrate)
Hyakoushou 
(Farmer)
Isha (Herbalists 
and Healers)
Kannushi 
(Shinto Priest)
So and Bozu 
(Buddhist 
Priest and 
Monk)
Sohei (Warrior 
Monk)
Youjutsusha 
(Sorcerer)
Bushi (Warrior)
Gaikoukan 
(Diplomat)
Hangan 
(Magistrate)
Sohei (Warrior 
Monk)

46
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Class

Caste
Senmin Ryokoo Courtesy +10%
Evaluate +10%, 
Inﬂuence +10%, 
Lore (World) 
+10%

Caste and Class Skills

Pick One 
Bow +10%
1H Sword +10%, 
Polearm+10%

Language 
(Japanese) 
+50%, Lore 
(Regional)

Pick Three
Art, 
Calligraphy*
Craft, Dance, 
Language, Lore, 
Mechanisms, 
Play Instrument, 
Streetwise

Personal 
Starting On
20+POW+CHA

Professions
Bushi (Warrior)
Daishonin 
(Scribe)
Gakusha 
(Scholar)
Isha (Herbalists 
and Healers)
Kannushi 
(Shinto Priest)
Reijin (Bard)
Shokunin 
(Craftsman)
So and Bozu 
(Buddhist 
Priest and 
Monk)
Sohei (Warrior 
Monk)
Togi (Acrobat/
Entertainer)
Youjutsusha 
(Sorcerer)

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

47

Caste

Class

Kanko

Caste and Class Skills
Basic
Courtesy +5%
Evaluate +5%
Inﬂuence +10%
Lore (World) 
+10%

Advanced
Language 
(Native) +50%
Lore (Regional)
Streetwise

Pick One
Calligraphy*
Craft
Dance
Language
Lore
Play Instrument
Shiphandling

Pick Two +10%
Boating, 
Persistence, 
Resilience, Sleight, 
Stealth

Pick Two +10%
1H Sword, 
Dagger, Bow, 
Polearm, Spear

Kenin

Language 
(Native) +50%
Lore (Regional)
Streetwise

Pick One
Calligraphy*
Craft
Dance
Language
Lore
Play Instrument
Shiphandling

Courtesy +5%
Evaluate +5%
Inﬂuence +10%
Lore (World) 
+10%

Pick Two +10%
Boating, 
Persistence, 
Resilience, Sleight, 
Stealth

Pick Two +10%
1H Sword, 
Dagger, Bow, 
Polearm, Spear

Professions

Personal 
Starting On

10+POW+CHA

5+POW+CHA

Bushi (Warrior)
Daishonin 
(Scribe)
Gakusha 
(Scholar)
Isha (Herbalists 
and Healers)
Kannushi 
(Shinto Priest)
Reijin (Bard)
Shokunin 
(Craftsman)
So and Bozu 
(Buddhist 
Priest and 
Monk)
Sohei (Warrior 
Monk)
Togi (Acrobat/
Entertainer)
Youjutsusha 
(Sorcerer)
Bushi (Warrior)
Daishonin 
(Scribe)
Gakusha 
(Scholar)
Hyakoushou 
(Farmer)
Isha (Herbalists 
and Healers)
Kannushi 
(Shinto Priest)
Nusubito 
(Thief)
Reijin (Bard)
Ryoushi 
(Fisherman)
Shokunin 
(Craftsman)
So and Bozu 
(Buddhist 
Priest and 
Monk)
Sohei (Warrior 
Monk)
Suifu (Sailor)
Togi (Acrobat/
Entertainer)
Youjutsusha 
(Sorcerer)

48
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Caste

Class

Caste and Class Skills
Basic

Advanced
Language 
(Japanese) +50%
Lore (Regional)

Pick Two
Craft
Dance
Lore
Play Instrument
Survival

Heimin Athletics +5%
Courtesy +5%
Lore (Animal) 
+5%
Lore (Plant) +10%
Resilience +5%

Pick Two +10%
Boating, Evade, 
Drive, First Aid, 
Persistence

Pick Two +10%
1H Axe, 1H Flail, 
1H Hammer, 
2H Axe, Dagger, 
Spear, Staff, 
Unarmed

Personal 
Starting On

POW+CHA

Professions

Akindo 
(Merchant)
Bushi (Warrior)
Gakusha 
(Scholar)
Hyakoushou 
(Farmer)
Isha (Herbalists 
and Healers)
Jojiki (Peddler)
Kannushi 
(Shinto Priest)
Nusubito 
(Thief)
Reijin (Bard)
Ryoushi 
(Fisherman)
Shokunin 
(Craftsman)
Sohei (Warrior 
Monk)
Suifu (Sailor)
Togi (Acrobat/
Entertainer)
Youjutsusha 
(Sorcerer)

*New Advanced skill.

On

On is honour; the amount of respect one can expect from others, based upon one’s social standing 
and personal reputation. The higher the On score, the more honourable and respected a person 
is. There is no theoretical upper limit for On, although it can never exceed that of the Emperor 
(or his Regent), an effective On of 200.

A character’s On derives from three sources: his caste class, his profession and his family. Consult 
the Social Clan and Family On table for Personal Starting On and then add to it the On for the 
profession. Next, determine the On of the clan or family and divide it by 20; add this to the 
personal On score.

On  can  be  gained  and  lost  depending  on  one’s  actions.  Failing  to  observe  rules  of  etiquette, 
for example, incurs an On loss; providing a valuable service, favour or securing an important 
military victory wins On. A guide to On gains and losses is provided in the nearby table. On 
cannot be increased through Skill Tests, only through rewards for actions.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

49

Using On
On is used in social situations and in one of two ways.

First, On is used directly, as a form of skill, when seeking a favour or service. An Opposed test 
is made between the character and the person he is hoping to placate (or is being placated by). 
If  the  test  is  successful,  the  character’s  honour  and  reputation  have  convinced  the  opponent 
enough to grant the service or favour being requested. If the test is failed, then the service is 
denied and the matter ends there. If the test is a critical success, the character has put forward 
his case with such eloquence, courtesy and sincerity that he gains 1D3 On as a result. However, 
if the Opposed test is fumbled, the character has made a blunder of some form; an inadvertent 
insult or inappropriate remark perhaps and sustains a loss of 1D3 On, as well as being denied.

The second use for On is as a bonus to the following skills: Inﬂuence, Art, Courtesy, Oratory 
and any other Advanced skill that involves social interaction. The character receives an automatic 
bonus to the skill of his On divided by 5. This reﬂects the way a character’s personal standing 
and honour carries through into particular actions through the expression of personality, manner 
and demeanour.

When there is a difference between social classes – Ryoko and Samurai for instance, the higher 
ranked class gains a bonus of 5 On for each step above the inferior class, for the purposes of that 
interaction. For example, a samurai with an On of 75, being petitioned by the headman of a 
heimin village with an On of 60, the samurai would treat his On as 95, receiving a bonus of +20 
for the difference between their stations.

Gaining On
On is gained for particular deeds. The pursuit of On, either through excellence in a particular 
endeavour or success on the battleﬁeld, is of major importance to all Japanese and On can be 
gained in all manner of ways. The table below outlines a selection of different scenarios where On 
can be attained and sample values for the gain. It is by no means and exhaustive list and Games 
Masters  should  award  On  for  any  successful  endeavour  that  is  likely  to  impress  and  enhance 
personal reputation.

Sample On Gains
Action
Complete a task or project that excels 
expectations
Complete a task or project to complete 
satisfaction
Create a work of art or excel in a performance 1D3
Defeat an enemy as part of a group 
1D4
engagement
Defeat an enemy in single combat
Demonstrate outstanding loyalty

1D2

Kill an enemy in single combat
Engage in an Arrow Duel
Undertake or complete a conspicuous act of 
bravery

50
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

On Gain
1D3+1

Enemy’s On/20
1D4+1  (depending  on  the  act,  this  may  be 
higher)
Enemy’s On/10
See page 104
2D3

Losing On
Losing  On  is  dreaded  prospect.  Personal  standing  and  reputation  is  hugely  important  to  all 
Japanese, and losing personal honour injures not only the individual but the family and clan as 
well. Whilst most can withstand some shame, a major loss of On may be considered so heinous 
that the only honourable recourse is to take one’s own life in the act of seppuku. A character who 
loses On equal to, or more than, his CHA divided by 4 is considered to have experienced a Minor 
Disgrace, and this is considered to be sustainable. A Lord or Daimyo might require the character to 
undertake a particular task, favour or atonement to compensate for the mistake.

Losing On equal to or more than CHA divided by two, is considered a Major Disgrace, and this is 
a very serious position for a character. A Major Disgrace always requires atonement of some kind, 
and this might take the form of the conﬁscation of property, loss of a title, or expulsion from the 
family, clan or service, depending on the transgression. Many who suffer a Major Disgrace join 
the priesthood in order to atone, whilst for a samurai, expelled from service, he becomes ronin 
and most likely unable to ﬁnd service easily (many ronin become bandits or beggars in order to 
simply survive).

Losing  On  equal  to  CHA  or  greater  is  considered  Shame,  and  Shame  almost  always  involves 
seppuku.  Commiting  seppuku  restores  respect  posthumously  and  negates  any  shame  brought 
upon the family or clan.

If On loss takes a character below the Class On for his class, there is the possibility that he is 
demoted to the next class down, and given an appointment reﬂecting the loss of social position. 
The character is allowed to petition his Lord in an Opposed On test, as described earlier, to try 
to avoid such a demotion.

1D4+1
1D3+1
1D2

On Loss
2D3
1D3
2D6

Sample On Losses
Action
Commit an act of cowardice
Commit fraud or tell a deliberate lie
Conspire against one’s Lord and be 
discovered/thwarted
Demonstrate overt disloyalty
Fail a task or project catastrophically
Fail to complete a task or project to complete 
satisfaction
Fail to show due deference to one’s superior
Involve oneself in a criminal act
Action
Murder a member of a lesser class without 
good reason
Murder a member of one’s own class or 
above
Offer a deliberate insult or inappropriate 
rebuke
Suffer a defeat to an enemy as part of a 
group engagement
Suffer a defeat to an enemy in single combat Enemy’s On/20

1D3 per difference in class
1D6 (depending on the act, this can be higher)
On Loss
1D3

2D3

1D4

1D4

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

51

Using Hero Points to Mitigate On Loss
If the Games Master wishes, characters may spend Hero Points to negate the loss of On. It costs 
1 Hero Point to negate up to a loss of 5 On (thus, a loss of 1-5 On costs 1 Hero Point, 6-10 
costs 2 and so forth).

Families and On
Clans and families have an On score, just as characters do. The On values are as follows.

Clan and Family On
Clan
Ando
Chino
Fujiwara
Genda
Imebe
Inihara
Jukodo
Kume
Maeda
Minamoto
Murata
Nakatomi
Nomura
Sarume
Otomo
Taira
Tokugawa

On
70
80
100
80
90
60
65
70
90
95
70
70
76
70
65
95
85

Allied Family On
60+2D10

Unallied Family On
50+2D10

Aspiring Family On
60+1D10

An allied family’s On cannot exceed the On score of the clan it is allied to. 

On between families and clans is used in exactly the same way as On for characters; to petition for 
favours and services and to act as a general guide to the family’s honour, reputation and standing. 
On can be gained and lost by clans and families in exactly the same way and for the same reasons, 
as characters. When individuals are representing family or clan interests and seeking approval or 
assistance at a family or clan level, then the On of the clan or family is used in place of individual 
On. Clans always preserve their own interests above those of an allied family, although clearly there 
are certain obligations inherent in any alliance. Conversely, even allied families want to protect and 
promote their own interests in addition to those of their allied clan and so orders from a clan that 
overtly clash with family interests may be resisted or even rejected, resulting in a loss of On, naturally 
but beneﬁcial in the long run. Unallied and aspiring families with relatively high On scores may 
very well be courted by others keen on forming beneﬁcial alliances. Clearly this will be of interest 
to aspiration-prone families but may be of little consequence to an unallied family, which may 
be content in its independence.

52
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Characters’ actions have an impact on family On as well as their own. Every 10 points of personal 
On gained or lost translates to 1 point of gain or loss for the family.

Money

A character’s starting money is based on their caste, class and profession. For the Ryomin, money 
is based on regular income from lands, estates, service and so forth. For Senmin, existence is 
more  hand  to  mouth  and  money  is  based  on  whatever  the  character  has  been  able  to  make 
through employment, trade or other services to the higher classes.

Caste
Ryomin

Senmin

Class
Imperial Family
Kuge
Buke
Samurai

Starting Money
4D10 x300 gin
4D10 x100 gin
4D10 x50 gin
4D10 x25 gin

Ryoko
Kanko
Kenin
Heimin

4D10 x10 gin
4D10 x20 mon
4D10 x15 mon
4D10 x10 mon

Income per Year
1D10 x500 koku
1D10 x100 koku
1D4 x100koku
1D4 x10 koku

1D4+1koku
2D2koku
2D2 koku
2D2 koku

Income per year comes from either regular stipends, paid to samurai or the amount of revenue a 
holding or estate produces. The Income per Year ﬁgure is the net of taxes paid to the government. 
Whilst the ﬁgure is expressed in koku, it is worth noting that the income is most likely generated 
in terms of rice, vegetables and other comestibles, rather than in hard currency. Samurai are often 
paid in rice or might be given land, depending on their status in the clan. If paid with land, 
they are expected to maintain it, police it and otherwise behave as a daimyo does. They are also 
expected to buy their own equipment, although gifts of equipment are sometimes given in lieu 
of a cash payment.

Professions

The professions available to Samurai of Legend characters differ from those in the standard Legend 
rules, reﬂecting the Japanese culture. For authenticity each profession is listed by its Japanese 
title, followed by its English title. Each profession also lists the skills available to characters and 
its starting On, which should be rolled and added to the Personal Starting On obtained for caste 
and class.

Akindo (Merchant)
Merchants do not occupy a particularly high status in Japanese society. More often than not 
considered  to  be  unscrupulous  and  with  little  regard  for  personal  honour  (or  the  honour  of 
others), merchants occupy the lower classes of society and even those who become very rich, 
are unlikely to move from being senmin to ryomin. However the merchant class still has an 
important part to play. Trade and commerce is a matter of fact for any society and whilst the 
Akindo may not attract the respect they believe they deserve, they are an essential aspect of life.

On: 1D6
Basic Skills: Evaluate +20%, Inﬂuence +10%, Lore (World) +10%
Advanced Skills: Pick One – Language, Lore (Commerce), Lore (Logistics), Craft

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

53

Bushi (Warrior)
Japanese warriors and soldiers are known as Bushi. Although the code of Bushido (‘The Way 
of the Warrior’) was not developed until the feudal era, its foundations lie in the general code 
of  ethics  found  in  the  ﬁghting  men  of  the  Heian  period.  Warriors  of  the  Ryomin  caste  are 
known  as  samurai,  although  that  term  actually  describes  a  social  caste  as  well  as  identifying 
any warrior who is retained by a Lord. Those Bushi that do not belong to the Ryomin caste are 
generally known as ashigaru and these are the unsung footmen of the many wars and battles who 
supported the glory-hunting samurai and enabled many of their exploits. The term ashigaru is 
also used for militiamen working in the towns and cities of Japan.

Samurai
To qualify for the title samurai a character must be of the samurai class or better. Whilst the 
traditional view of the samurai is that of the expert swordsman, in Heian Japan the samurai 
were actually experts with the bow, the horse and the sword. The most important qualities for 
a samurai of this period are expressed as kyuba no michi – the Way of the Horse and Bow or 
kyusen no michi – the Way of the Bow and Arrow. During the Heian period the bow was the 
every bit as important as the sword and the ability to ride and shoot a daikyu, the Japanese 
longbow, was the mark of a true samurai.

As the word samurai means ‘To Serve,’ all samurai bushi pledge allegiance to a Lord. Usually 
this is their daimyo, the one who retains them but this can just as equally be a commander, the 
head of a clan or the Emperor himself. In so pledging themselves samurai are expected to ﬁght 
with honour and glory and to hone his understanding of the strategy, tactics and spirituality 
of warfare as much as his practical bow and sword skills. The samurai who are truly revered in 
the Heian period, even by their enemies, are those who have a complete command of the arts 
of war, such as Taira Masakado and Minamoto Yoshiie. Both were commanders who genuinely 
respected and looked after their warriors and in return, helped to create the foundations of the 
Bushido code which developed over the following centuries.

On: 3D6. Any samurai picking Yabusame as one of his skills gains +5 On.
Basic Skills: Courtesy +10%, Inﬂuence +5%, Ride (Bajutsu) +10%; Pick Two from: Athletics 
+10%, 1H Sword (Kenjutsu) +10%, 2H Sword (no-dachi) +10%, Polearm (Naginatajutsu)+10%, 
Bow (Kyujutsu) +10%, Yabusame +10%

Advanced Skills: Pick One from: Dance, Oratory, Play Instrument, Survival

Ashigaru
If the samurai are the elite, then the ashigaru are the steady infantry and militiamen. Bushi of 
humble birth, some strive to become samurai (and some do) but all are prepared to ﬁght for 
their clan, family and lands (sometimes with reluctance, perhaps), even though their names 
are never to be remembered in the history books.

All ashigaru are in service to a Lord – usually the daimyo for the region or a samurai who has 
been granted governorship of a town, city district or a particular region. When not serving in 
battle, ashigaru are expected to act as part-time militia and to help with mundane, family tasks 
for the remainder.

On: 2D6
Basic Skills: Evade +5%, Lore (World) +5%, Resilience +5%, Unarmed +5%. Pick Three from: 
1H Axe (Masakarijutsu) +10%, 2H Axe (Onojutsu) +10%, 1H Sword (Kenjutsu)+10%, 2H 

54
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Sword (no-dachi) +10%, Athletics +10%, Bow (Kyujutsu) +10%, 2H Spear (Sojutsu) +10%, 
Polearm (Naginatajutsu)+10%, Ride (Bajutsu)+10%, 

Daishonin (Scribe)
Daishonin serve in all areas of Japanese society; as secretaries to ministers, magistrates, daimyo, 
court ofﬁcials and so forth. Their task is to take notes, prepare ofﬁcial documents, attend to 
smaller administrative affairs and help run the institutions of a clan, family, ministry or area of 
Court. Often overlooked, daishonin are party to all kinds of knowledge and secrets, although 
their silence beyond their ofﬁce is expected absolutely.

On: 2D6
Basic Skills: Courtesy +10%, Evaluate +5%, Lore (World) +5%
Advanced Skills: Language. Pick Two from: Art, Language (either a new language or an additional 
+10% to an existing language), Lore

Gaikoukan (Diplomat)
All clans and noble houses employ diplomats. These might be honoured scribes and servants or 
retired samurai but the purpose is the same: to represent the interests of the clan or daimyo at 
Court or elsewhere. They thus carry with them the reputation of those they represent and are 
able to speak with authority on behalf of their Lord. In the fraught times of the Heian period, 
where the jockeying for political power is rife, gaikoukan are an important part of the socio-
political process.

On: 3D6
Basic Skills: Courtesy +10%, Inﬂuence +10%, Lore (World) +5%, Perception +10%
Advanced Skills: Pick One from: Dance, Language, Lore, Play Instrument

Gakusha (Scholar)
Most  scholars,  the  gakusha,  are  members  of  temples,  primarily  Buddhist  but  also  Shinto  or 
are  scholars  within  the  ministries  of  the  Imperial  Court.  Education,  study  and  learning  are 
heavily promoted in the Heian period, following edicts from Emperor Kammu and preserved 
by subsequent Emperors; thus, professional scholars, even those of the Senmin, are given a great 
deal of respect and their views sought.

On: 2D6
Basic Skills: Evaluate +5%, Lore (World) +5%, Persistence +10%
Advanced Skills. Pick two from: Lore (any), Lore (Buddhist Theology), Lore (Chinese Classics)
 
Hangan (Magistrate)
Magistrates are placed by daimyo to regulate the affairs of villages and towns, hearing petitions, 
presiding over legal rulings and generally representing the presence of the daimyo to the masses. 
Magistrates are either retired or serving samurai, honoured servants or those seeking the higher 
status of the diplomat. As such, they command a great deal of local authority, although, especially 
in the outlying provinces, samurai authority prevails over that of the Hangan. Magistrates are 
also expected to interpret Imperial Law, applying that which is relevant and re-interpreting the 
rest to favour their daimyo.

On: 2D6
Basic Skills: Courtesy +10%, Inﬂuence +10%, Lore (World) +5%, Perception +5%
Advanced Skills: Pick One from: Lore, Oratory, Streetwise

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

55

Hyakoushou (Farmer)
As Japan has little land for grazing and because most Japanese do not eat a great deal of meat, 
the Hyakoushou are primarily crop farmers, either cultivating in rice from the paddyﬁelds or 
cereals, fruit and vegetables – although land is scarce, in Honshu at least, for such commodities. 
Just  about  every  farm  is  subsistence  in  nature,  with  a  tribute  paid  to  the  local  daimyo  and 
perhaps a little to sell in the towns and cities. The farmers of Japan are a simple, superstitious 
people, revering the local kami who they hope will protect them from the weather, mudslides, 
earthquakes, drought and famine (of which there are several during the Heian period) and the 
predations of bandits.

On: 1D6
Basic Skills: Athletics +5%, Drive +5%, Lore (Animal) +15%, Lore (Plant) +15%, Resilience 
+10%

Isha (Herbalists and Healers)
Isha specialise in herbal remedies, usually having studied the extensive Chinese texts on these 
matters and made their own studies of native herbs and plants. As scholars in a particular ﬁeld, 
they can command a deal of respect whatever their social rank, although, naturally, the Ryomin 
have their own Isha and would never dream of sending for a Senmin herbalist.

On: 2D6
Basic Skills: First Aid +5%, Inﬂuence +10%, Lore (Plant)+5%, Perception +10%
Advanced Skills: Healing. Pick One from: Language, Lore (Chinese Herbalism), Lore (Local 
Herbalism)

Jojiki (Peddler)
Itinerant peddlers and beggars are a common sight throughout Japan; out-of-luck ashigaru, fallen 
priests and just those of the Senmin who want to wander rather than toil in the paddyﬁelds. Most 
beg their way, making (or stealing) a few trinkets and charms to sell here and there. However 
in  their  travels  they  see  and  hear  much  and  if  one  wants  news  from  somewhere,  it  is  often 
considered a simple courtesy to buy a Jojiki a cup of sake and a few rice balls in return for gossip.

On: 1D6
Basic Skills: Evaluate +10%, Inﬂuence +10%, Lore (World) +10%, Resilience +5%
Advanced Skills: Pick one from: Language, Lore, Streetwise, Survival

Kannushi (Shinto Priest)
Shinto supports no hierarchical clergy in the way Buddhism does. Instead, Shinto priests, the 
kannushi, are those who are somehow naturally in-tune with the kami and able to recognise their 
presence. Whilst there is no temple or church to belong to, it is common for a kannushi to attach 
himself to a particular shrine and act as its keeper and tender. 

They are thus concerned with the proper worship and reverence of the kami and in particular, 
with achieving personal spiritual purity. As a result, kannushi have, in addition to their other 
attributes and skills, a value called Purity, which is used in their dealings with kami. Kannushi are 
very concerned with the state of nature in all its forms. Shinto is an animist religion, believing that 
nature itself is aware and watching. They are troubled by matters they consider unclean: the acts 
of birth and death, disease and healing and the presence of sorcery. These things attract pollution, 
which is anathema to the Kannushi and devalues his presence in the eyes of the kami.

56
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

On: 2D6
Basic  Skills:  Inﬂuence  +15%,  Persistence  +10%.  Pick  One  from:  Lore  (Animal)  +5%,  Lore 
(Plant) +5%, Lore (World) +5%
Advanced Skills: Art, Lore (Shinto), 

All kannushi begin with a Purity equal to 10+POW+CHA.

Kannushi can also channel magic or petition for it but they cannot learn or hold spells within 
their soul or psyche, for this is considered pollution. See the Magic of Japan chapter for more 
information on how Shinto magic works.

Nusubito (Thief)
Professional thieves are a rarity in Japan. More common are bandits and desperate ronin who raid 
and waylay, rather than to rob and burgle. Theft is, of course, highly dishonourable, whatever 
its form but the act of stealing stealthily as a way of life is considered particularly so and the 
punishment for theft can be death. Thieves still exist, acting as conﬁdence tricksters, forgers and 
burglars to make their way in life.

On: 1D6
Basic Skills: Acrobatics +5%, Evaluate +5%, Perception +10%, Sleight +10%, Stealth +10%
Advanced Skills: Pick One from: Disguise, Lore, Mechanisms, Streetwise

Reijin (Bard)
Heian Japan has a very strong bardic tradition. The Japanese love stories, songs and poems of 
all kinds, especially those declaiming the heroism of a particular family or clan or a brave and 
glorious samurai. Bards are thus found amongst both the Ryomin and Senmin, with Ryomin 
Reijin ﬁnding particular favour in the Imperial Court and noble households. Ryomin Reijin 
tend to be women, for they are the ones who are tasked with entertaining, whilst wandering 
Reijin, exclusive to the Senmin caste, tend to be male.

Several great works of Japanse literature are a direct result of the Ryomin Reijin tradition; the 
Heike Monogatari,  which  recounts the struggles between the Taira and Minamoto clans; The 
Pillow Book, which recounts life in the Court of Empress Sadako; and the Genji Monogatari, 
which is the world’s ﬁrst novel. All written by women of the Heian Court.

All Reijin are skilled in telling stories, playing music and creating haiku.

On: 1D6
Basic Skills: Inﬂuence +10%, Perception +5%, Play Instrument +10%, Sing +15%
Advanced Skills: Pick One from: Art, Dance, Language, Lore

Ryoushi (Fisherman)
Fish is a dietary staple and many members of the Heimin class are ﬁshermen, trawling the coasts 
of  the  outlying  and  inland  seas  for  a  catch  to  support  their  families  and  communities.  Like 
farmers, Ryoushi are superstitious, with an innate knowledge of the coastal conditions around 
their locale and a healthy reverence for the kami of the tides, currents, cliffs and reefs. Special 
reverence is given to the fujin, the kami of winds and the kaijin, the kami of the currents and 
waves.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

57

On: 1D6
Basic Skills: Athletics +5%, Boating +5%, Lore (Animal) +5%, Resilience +5%, Throwing +10%
Advanced Skills: Pick One from: Craft, Shiphandling

Shokunin (Craftsman)
Whilst  always  part  of  the  Senmin  caste,  Japanese  craftsmen  are  held  in  high  regard,  especially 
weaponsmiths. The very best receive special favours from their Lord and the things they make 
attract value and reverence. As with most Japanse, Shokunin aim to achieve absolute excellence 
in  their  work,  making  them  dedicated,  diligent,  patient  and  hungry  to  develop  or  learn  new 
techniques. Being able to present an especially ﬁne sword or bow to one’s Lord is something all 
Shokunin strive towards, even though the material rewards might be low, the prestige, in terms of 
On, makes the effort worthwhile.

On: 2D6
Basic Skills: Evaluate +20%, Inﬂuence +5%, Persistence +5%
Advanced Skills: Craft. Pick One from: Craft (other), Engineering, Mechanisms

So and Bozu (Buddhist Monk and Priest)
Buddhists follow the way of the Buddha and in Heian Japan, are divided into two sects, the 
Shingon and Tendai schools, explored in more depth in the Religions chapter. Buddhist priests, 
So, can be either practicing as part of a temple, such as the main temples in Nara and Enryakuji 
or  be  at  large  in  a  community,  as  itinerant  preachers  or  living  and  working  in  a  city,  town 
or village. Those who choose to remain cloistered as the monks or Bozu, rarely, if ever, leave 
their monasteries. Samurai of Legend characters can choose to be either So or Bozu and as well 
as  making  this  choice,  the  character  should  also  decide  which  sect  of  Buddhism  is  followed, 
consulting the Religions chapter for more detail on what their worship entails. A third school 
of Buddhism merges the faiths of Buddhism and Shinto together into Ryobu-Shinto and this 
school believes that the Shinto kami are manifestations of the Buddha.

Priests come from all walks of life and their previous class and caste counts for relatively little 
within the halls of the monastery or temple. It is common for retired Emperors and members of 
the Imperial Court to become Bozu (or Amu, the female equivalent).

On: 2D6
Basic Skills: Courtesy +5%, Inﬂuence +10%, Persistence +10%. Pick One from: Lore (Animal) 
+5%, Lore (Plant) +5%, Lore (World) +5%

Advanced Skills: Art. Pick One from: Lore (Ryobu Theolgy), Lore (Shingon Theology), Lore 
(Tendai Theology), 

All So and Bozu begin with a Purity equal to 10+POW+CHA.

Buddhists priests are able to call upon Divine magic, as described in the Religions and Magic of 
Japan chapters.

Sohei and Yamabushi (Warrior Monk)
Sohei are warriors who have taken holy orders and serve in the standing armies maintained by 
the main Buddhist temples of Nara and Heizan. Sohei are always attached to a monastery and 
never some small, provincial temple. As well as studying Buddhist theology, Sohei are expected 
to  develop  and  hone  their  martial  skills. The  favoured  weapon  of  the  Sohei  is  the  naginata, 

58
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

although many use other weapons and swords are commonplace. The role of the warrior monk 
is to defend the temple but also to go out and enforce the temple’s wishes if necessary. Sometimes 
this means armed coercion and sometimes it means all-out war. On more than one occasion 
Sohei were banished from the capital for the trouble they caused.

The honour and ethics of the samurai are lacking in most Sohei, although if a Sohei is a retired 
samurai, then they might still be present in the individual, they are replaced with devotion to the 
temple, the abbot, the sect and their own, personal interests.

On: 2D6
Basic Skills: Evade +5%, Lore (World) +5%, Resilience +5%, Unarmed +5%. Pick Two from: 
1H  Sword  (Kenjutsu)+10%,  2H  Sword  (no-dachi)  +10%,  Shield  +10%,  Athletics  +10%, 
Bow  (Kyujutsu)  +10%,  2H  Spear  (Sojutsu)  +10%,  Polearm  (Naginatajutsu)+10%,  Ride 
(Bajutsu)+10%, 

Advanced Skills: Pick one from Lore (Shingon Theology), Lore (Tendai Theology)

Sohei  are  able  to  call  upon  Divine  magic,  as  described  in  the  Religions  and  Magic  of  Japan 
chapters.

Suifu (Sailor)
Whilst Japan is not noted as a sea-faring nation, sea travel is an important part of life. Most 
vessels are coast-huggers, not designed for long sea-voyages but the crews of these vessels are as 
competent as any.

On: 1D6
Basic Skills: Acrobatics +10%, Athletics +10%, Boating +10%, Lore (World) +5%, Resilience 
+5%
Advanced Skills: Shiphandling

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

59

Teishin (Courtier)
Teishin (or the female equivalent, Jishin) are the courtiers of the Imperial Court: members of 
the Kuge, the aristocracy, that occupy positions of favour and State and represent the Imperial 
Family’s prestige and grandiosity. In Heian Japan the court is a mixture of the most powerful 
clans  of  the  time:  the  Fujiwara,  which  is  dominant,  the  Minamoto  and  the Taira.  Courtiers 
are thus related, in one way or another, to one of these clans and by extension, to the Imperial 
Family – although no Teishin is eligible to rule directly. Teishin occupy themselves with matters 
of culture and state, either in direct or indirect ways. They live a life of privilege and esteem, 
secluded from the harsh reality beyond the capital and largely insulated from the grime of life 
in  the  capital  city. They  attend  when  the  Emperor  or  Regent  requests  it,  offering  advice  or 
providing information or entertainment as needs demand. In return they can expect to exert a 
little inﬂuence on the rulers and are an inspiration to the lower orders.

On: 3D6
Basic Skills: Courtesy, +10%, Inﬂuence +10%, Perception +5%, Sleight +5%
Advanced Skills: Pick Two from: Art, Dance, Lore (Art), Lore (Classics), Lore (Literature), Lore 
(Philosophy), Lore (Regional), Play Instrument
Togi (Acrobat/Entertainer)
Togi are popular amongst the Senmin, mixing feats of acrobatics and street-theatre to tell stories 
and generally amuse. Always of a relatively low rank, there are occasions where a Togi might be 
invited to entertain a daimyo or appear at a Court function but for the most part, the streets are 
their stage.

On: 1D6
Basic Skills: Acrobatics +10%, Athletics +5%, Perception +5%, Play Instrument +10%, Sing 
+10%
Advanced Skills: Pick One from: Art, Dance, Language, Lore

Youjutsusha (Sorcerer)
Sorcerers are a curious breed; sometimes priests who have fallen from the path or scholars who 
have delved too deeply into arts that should not concern them. Sorcerers study the manipulation 
of reality through the application of magical formula, seeking to impose their own will on a 
natural order. Sorcerers are therefore anathema to Buddhism and Shinto alike, distrusted and 
disliked by the superstitious common folk and the Imperial Court which fears their power.

Sorcerers have been outlawed since the start of the Heian period, forbidden, upon pain of death, 
from  entering the  capital. Samurai hunt-down any who are suspected of being sorcerers  and 
many who have demonstrated an interest in the sorcerous arts have been forced to ﬂee to the 
northern provinces, taking shelter in remote areas or even retreating to Hokkaido and living 
amongst the barbarian Ainu, where their work is not denigrated.

Some sorcerers are genuinely benign and still seek to follow Buddhism but supplement their 
understanding through the manipulation of the material world. Others are corrupt, in league 
with the dark forces of the oni and bakemono, forsaking any semblance of respect for normal 
society. It is said that a league of dispossessed, embittered sorcerers exists, plotting the complete 
downfall of the Imperial system and using their powers to engineer war.

On: 0
Basic Skills: Evaluate +5%, Lore (World) +5%, Persistence +10%
Advanced Skills: Pick Three Sorcery Skills/Spells

60
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Skills

To lend authenticity, western skill names for Legend skills have been supplemented with their 
Japanese equivalent. Thus, Ride is known as Bajutsu (‘Way of the Horse’). A full glossary is given 
below.

Courtesy, an Advanced skill from the Legend Core Rulebook, has now been made a Basic skill. 
Matters of etiquette are so central to Japanese life that everyone knows and understands how one 
is expected to behave in any social situation.

Japanese Skill Name
Bajutsu
Bojutsu
Jujutsu
Kamajutsu
Kenjutsu
Kusarijutsu
Kyujutsu
Masakarijutsu
Naginatajutsu
Onojutsu
Sojutsu
Tantojutsu
Sodegaramijutsu

Legend Equivalent
Ride
Staff
Martial Arts
1H Flail
1H and 2H sword
2H Flail
Bow
1H Axe
Polearm
2H Axe
Spear
Dagger
Polearm

New Advanced Skills
Calligraphy (INT+DEX)
Known as Shogaku, calligraphy is the art of drawing the Japanese ideograms with a perfect and 
ﬂuid hand. Experts in Shogaku produce not writing but works of ﬁne art and this skill is used 
in preparing ofﬁcial documents, licences and so on. It is also used when composing haiku or 
other forms of poetry and the intention is that the quality of the calligraphy should represent the 
emotions and beauty being expressed in the words of the poem.

Divination (INT)
Divination is popular in Japan, especially the I-Ching system imported from China. I-Ching 
aims to predict the future using a series of 64 ideograms made up of straight and broken lines 
(representing yin and yang), arranged into groups of six. Each ideogram is generated randomly, 
by tossing a coin or some other method that produces either a yin or a yang result. In this way, 
diviners believe, the path of Time can be cross-sectioned and examined, giving an insight into 
the future.

Characters using Divination should be given a hint or obscure clue (‘the sun will rise to a Black 
Dawn’) as to what the future holds if they make a successful Divination test. I-Ching readings 
are typically abstract and open to much personal interpretation; they do not offer a concrete 
insight into what is to come. If the Divination test is a critical success, then the I-Ching reading 
is a little less obscure and more deﬁnite in its interpretation (‘the sun will rise to a Black Dawn 
when the goose ﬂies north’).

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

61

Falconry (INT+DEX)
Hunting with birds of prey is a popular pastime amongst the kuge and buke. This skill, known 
as Tori-oi, covers both the ritualistic aspects of hunting and the ability to train and control a bird 
of prey. A well trained bird can be used to attack foes as well as bring-down game.

Heraldry (INT)
Every family and clan has a mon, a heraldic device, indicating loyalty and allegiance as well as 
identifying the particular owner. Mon are worn as devices on clothing as well as being carried as 
battle standards. A typical mon is a particular design supplemented by the kanji for the family or 
clan or a motto adopted by the owner.

Iajutsu (DEX)
This a martial skill, much practiced by samurai and is the ability to draw a scabbarded sword 
and make a single, sweeping cut in one, ﬂuid motion. Iajutsu duels are common to demonstrate 
prowess.

A successful Iajutsu test allows a character to draw and strike with his sword in the same Combat 
Action. A critical roll also strikes an opponent as a Free Attack, with the appropriate damage. If 
the roll is a failure, then the weapon is drawn (but does not hit). If the test is a fumble, then the 
weapon is not readied and the ﬁrst Combat Action is lost.  Note: Iajutsu is most effective with 
the katana, which is worn with the blade edge facing upwards. The tachi, the principal sword of 
the era, is worn the opposite way and requires two hands to draw. Iajutsu is possible with a tachi 
but at a –10% penalty.

Meditation (POW)
Meditation is common amongst priests and monks, allowing them to clear their minds completely 
of earthly concerns and concentrate solely on being at one with the universe. Each hour above 
the  ﬁrst  spent  in  meditation  gives  a  bonus  of  +5%  to  the  Meditation  skill.  If  the  Meditation 
test  is  successful  the  character  gains  a  bonus  to  all  Skill Tests  equal  to  his  critical  score  in  the 
modiﬁed Meditation skill. This bonus lasts for a period of hours equal to the amount of time spent 
meditating. If the Meditation test is a critical success, the bonus is doubled.

Example:  Issai,  a  Buddhist  monk,  decides  to  spend  three  hours  in  meditation  before  writing  a 
particularly important philosophical tract for his abbot. His Meditation skill is 50% and every hour 
above the ﬁrst gives him a +5% bonus, so for three hours of meditation, his Skill Test is 60%. The test 
is successful and so for the next three hours after ﬁnishing his meditation he gains a bonus of +6% to 
all his skills. If his meditation had been a critical success, the bonus would have been +12%.

Yabusame (DEX)
Yabusame  is  a  combination  of  two  skills:  Bajutsu  and  Kyujutsu.  It  is  the  samurai’s  ability  to 
control a horse with his legs and knees whilst aiming and ﬁring a dai kyu at the same time, even 
at full gallop. A character using Yabusame suffers no penalties to dai kyu attacks from horseback 
if he uses this skill and it is used for both shooting the bow and controlling the horse, effectively 
replacing the Bajutsu and Kyujutsu skills. If the character is on foot and using a bow, Kyujutsu 

62
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

should be used although Yabusame may be used but at a –20% penalty to the chance to hit. 
Similarly riding a horse with both hands on the reins requires Bajutsu although Yabusame can 
be used at a similar –20% penalty.

Yadomejutsu (DEX)
‘Arrow Cutting’ is the ability to slice an arrow in ﬂight with either a sword or more commonly, 
the naginata; however, for the purposes of Samurai of Legend, any weapon, including natural 
weapons, may be used. A character uses this skill to parry any missile attack launched at him; if 
successful, the missile is successfully cut or deﬂected, causing no damage.

Gifts and Heirlooms

As a ﬁnal stage of creating a Samurai of Legend adventurer, each character should make a Skill 
Test against his On value. If successful, the character may roll once on the Gifts and Heirlooms 
table below, to receive something either gifted to him by his Lord (or a patron) in recognition 
of services rendered or passed-down to him by his father or mother. If the On test is critical 
the character may roll twice, taking both items. The character should also spend a few minutes 
creating a history for the items he has received, outlining who gave it to him, why and what the 
gift or heirloom represents to the character. This is especially important for weapons that are 
‘Surpassing’ or ‘Heroic’ in quality, as these are truly magniﬁcent gifts indeed and will always have 
a story connected with them.

The  Quality  entry  represents  the  quality  of  the  weapon  or  armour.  The  character  should 
determine the special effects of the weapon in consultation with the Games Master.

If the character receives Armour, then it is appropriate to his station. That is, Ryomin receive 
samurai armour and Senmin receive ashigaru armour.

Quality
Normal: A perfectly reasonable job, the item is as normal is it gets, gaining no extra Enhancements.
Greater: The item is a good quality, it gains 1 Enhancement.
Exquisite:  The  item  is  much  better  and  has  a  greater  level  of  craftsmanship,  it  gains  2 
Enhancements.
Marvellous: A gift suitable for someone of high station, this item gains 3 Enhancements.
Surpassing: Masterwork craftsmanship which gains 4 Enhancements.
Heroic: A truly legendary item, only a few of these may exist and they are of a near-magical 
quality. They gain all 5 Enhancements.

Enhancements
Highly Desirable: The item’s value is doubled.
Highly Durable: The item’s Hit Points are increased by half again.
Highly Resilient: The item’s Armour Points are increased by half again.
Highly Efﬁcient: The item’s quality is such, it confers a +5% bonus to the skill required to use it.
Highly Effective: A weapon gains +1 to its Damage Rating. Other items reduce ENC value by 
1D2 points.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

63

Gifts and Heirlooms Table
1D100
01-03
04-05
06-07
08
09
10
11-13
14-15
16-17
18
19
20
21-22
23-24
25
26
27
28
29-31
32-33
34-35
36
37
38
39-41
42-43
44-45
46
47
48
49-51
52-53
54-55
56
57
58
59-60
61-62
63-64
65
66

Item
Armour
Armour
Armour
Armour
Armour
Armour
Daikyu
Daikyu
Daikyu
Daikyu
Daikyu
Daikyu
Dai-Sho
Dai-Sho
Dai-Sho
Dai-Sho
Dai-Sho
Dai-Sho
Hankyu
Hankyu
Hankyu
Hankyu
Hankyu
Hankyu
Katana
Katana
Katana
Katana
Katana
Katana
Naginata
Naginata
Naginata
Naginata
Naginata
Naginata
Tachi
Tachi
Tachi
Tachi
Tachi

64
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Quality/Notes
Normal 
Greater
Exquisite
Marvellous
Surpassing
Heroic
Normal 
Greater
Exquisite
Marvellous
Surpassing
Heroic
Normal 
Greater
Exquisite
Marvellous
Surpassing
Heroic
Normal 
Greater
Exquisite
Marvellous
Surpassing
Heroic
Normal 
Greater
Exquisite
Marvellous
Surpassing
Heroic
Normal 
Greater
Exquisite
Marvellous
Surpassing
Heroic
Normal 
Greater
Exquisite
Marvellous
Surpassing

1D100
67
68-70
71-72
73-74
75
76
77
78-80
81-82
83-84
85
86
87
88-90
91-92
93-94
95
96
97
98-99

00

Item
Tachi
Tanto
Tanto
Tanto
Tanto
Tanto
Tanto
Wakazashi
Wakazashi
Wakazashi
Wakazashi
Wakazashi
Wakazashi
Yari
Yari
Yari
Yari
Yari
Yari
Horse

Property

Quality/Notes
Heroic
Normal 
Greater
Exquisite
Marvellous
Surpassing
Heroic
Normal 
Greater
Exquisite
Marvellous
Surpassing
Heroic
Normal 
Greater
Exquisite
Marvellous
Surpassing
Heroic
For Ryomin, a warhorse; for Senmin a 
normal horse
For Ryomin, a house and land yielding 1D4 
koku per year; for Senmin a small house 
and vegetable plot or small rice paddy

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

65

equipment of the samurai

This  chapter  explores  the  equipment  available  to  Samurai  of  Legend  characters,  describing 
uniquely Japanese items, weapons and armour. Prices and availability are given, along with the 
western and Japanese names for the things being described. Note that the prices are quoted for 
standard versions of goods. Better quality items cost more.

Equipment Quality
Japanese  craftsmen,  even  the  most  humble  of  heimin,  strive  towards  perfection. The  ability 
to make that superlative item, be it sword or sandal, which is admired and commented upon, 
confers status and respect. To this end, it is recommended that the Equipment Quality mechanics 
in the previous chapter be employed to measure the quality of goods and determine the beneﬁts 
granted to those who use them.

Armour

Samurai typically only wear armour when going into combat. For everyday affairs, they wear 
their  robes  of  ofﬁce  and  are  only  likely  to  don  armour  when  called  to  arms  by  their  Lord. 
Of course, adventuring and questing samurai might consider the wearing of armour perfectly 
appropriate, depending on the circumstances but as samurai like to project the image of being 
expert warriors with little fear of combat, pain or death, donning armour could be construed as 
either a weakness or a lack of skill, in the eyes of others and so the wearing of armour is never an 
automatic decision and always wholly dependent on the circumstances he is to face and who the 
opponents and witnesses might be.

Samurai Armour - Yoroi
Japanese  armour  is  of  a  lamellar  design  with  small  iron  or  leather  scales  tied  together  and 
lacquered, before being bound together by silk cords to form armour plates. As iron is extremely 
difﬁcult to wear, not to mention expensive to make, iron scales tend to concentrate on the most 
vulnerable  areas  and  are  otherwise  alternated  with  leather  scales. The  classic  suit  of  samurai 
armour  is  called  a  yoroi  and  whilst  relatively  light,  is  somewhat  inﬂexible  and  box-like  in 
structure. The main reason for this is because most samurai prefer to ﬁght from horseback and 
so their armour is designed to be light, offer maximum cover to the rider and offer optimum 
movement necessary for riding and shooting a bow. Dismounted, samurai suffer from restricted 
movement if wearing a full yoroi suit.

A suit of yoroi comes in four principal sections. The do covers the chest and abdomen. The sode 
are a pair of large, square or rectangular shoulder plates that leave the arms free to use a bow 

66
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

or sword and are fastened at the rear of the armour by an ornamental bow called an agemaki. 
The helmet (kabuto) is a bowl made from eight to twelve plates of iron and leather and fastened 
together with large, conical rivets. The helmet’s peak, usually brightly patterned, is called the 
mabisashi and a neck-guard, the shikoro, hangs from the back of the helmet, riveted in place. 
For additional protection, a face mask, called a happuri, is worn in conjunction with the helmet 
and this protects the brow and cheeks. Traditionally samurai of the Heian period do not wear 
armour on the right arm so that it is free to draw the bow. The left arm is a simple, baggy sleeve 
with scales sown into it, called a kote, allowing for some protection.

Whilst most of the time the legs go un-armoured, to make sure horse control is unimpeded, 
thigh guards (haidate) and shin guards (suneate) might be worn if the samurai is going into battle 
on foot and to protect the legs whilst on horseback.

Yoroi Armour
Armour
Full Suit of Yoroi
Kabuto

Happuri

Do
Kote

Haidate
Suneate

AP
–
5

1

5
2

1
1

ENC
9
1

Locations
See below
Head

Cost
300 gin*
30 gin

Armour Penalty
-5
-1

–

2
1

1
1

Head (face)

Chest, Abdomen
Left Arm

Legs (upper)
Legs (lower)

5 gin

80 gin
30 gin

30 gin
25 mon

-1

-2
-1

-1
-1

* Buying a complete suit of yoroi is always more expensive than purchasing the components 
separately. The suit is made for the wearer and incorporates personal colouring, clan or family 
mon and other unique touches, all of which contributes to the price. The armour, however, is 
personal and striking.

Ashigaru Armour – Do-Maru
Ashigaru footsoldiers have to be content with a much simpler set of armour known as do-maru, 
which means ‘body wrapper’. Like the do of the samurai’s yoroi, the do-maru covers the chest 
and abdomen but is not as rigid or constricting. Instead it resembles an armoured coat, pinched 
at the waist by a belt or tightly tied sash. The helmet is of an open design and whilst not as 
elaborate as that of the samurai, still affords decent protection. Both shin guards and wrist guards 
are worn.

Armour
Do-Maru suit
Kabuto
Do-Maru
Wrist Guards
Haidate

AP
–
5
3
2
2

ENC Locations
5
See below
Head
1
Chest, Abdomen
2
Arms
1
1
Legs

Cost
125 gin
15 gin
40 gin
15 gin
15 gin 

Armour Penalty
-4
-1
-2
-1
-1

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

67

Clothing
Belt (Obi)
The traditional sash worn as part of everyday clothing by both men and women. Male obis are 
thinner and of a less complex design than the female version. The obi is used by men to carry the 
sword or dai-sho with the scabbard tucked ﬁrmly into place on the left side of the body.
Boots and Clogs (Geta)
The Japanese do not wear boots or shoes as westerners know them and boots are exceedingly rare 
and only worn as part of armour by high ranking buke, if at all. For cold weather areas, such as 
Hokkaido, fur boots are worn and these are called kegetsu.

The standard form of footwear is the geta or wooden sandal. Secured to the foot by a straw 
thong, the geta is a wooden platform with a pair of wooden raisers attached laterally across the 
base. Geta look ungainly but the Japanese wear them as naturally as westerners wear shoes or 
boots. A pair of socks or tabi, is worn with geta but only in colder months or when raining.

Court Tabard (Kataginu)
The kataginu is a vest-like garment made of silk or cotton and with heavily starched shoulders. 
It is worn by samurai and other buke and forms part of the ceremonial garb rather than everyday 
wear.

Hats (Eboshi, Kasa and Hachi-Maki)
Everyone wears a hat and like most things Japanese, the style of hat denotes function, rank and 
social standing. Paper and straw hats of the wide, conical variety (eboshi and kasa respectively), 
are worn by heimin at work in the paddy ﬁelds. Headbands (hachi-maki) are worn by artisans, 
samurai and sohei alike. Priests wear more elaborate, lacquered eboshi for ceremonial occasions. 
Certain wandering priests wear a tall, conical hat rather like a basket that covers the entire face, 
the wearer peering out from between the weave but certain temple edicts made during the Heian 
period forbade such headgear.

68
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Jacket (Haori)
An  everyday,  lapel-less  jacket  worn  over  a  kimono  and  worn  by  all  castes  and  classes.  More 
expensive varieties are decorated with mon. Length varies, ranging from short, waist-length haori, 
through to knee-length versions.

Kimono
The familiar everyday robes worn by almost everybody in Japan. Made of cotton or silk and 
in a wide variety of lengths and styles, it is generally worn over trousers or undergarments and 
secured with an obi. Ryomin kimonos are usually decorated with the mon of the family or clan 
and can be either plain or patterned, depending on the formality acquired (and funds available).

Clothing

Belt
Boots
Clogs
Court Tabard
Hat
Jacket
Kimono

Gin

2

Mon
20
40
20

5 – 30
10 – 120 
50 – 300

Everyday Items

The items in the table below are for everyday goods and consumables, listed in price by mon 
(copper) and gin (silver). The prices quote for basic quality items. Items of greater quality, beauty 
or made by an especially famed craftsman, will cost more.

Everyday Items

Item 
Animals and Livestock
Cow or Ox
Dog, domesticated
Dog, guard or hunting
Horse, riding
Horse, war
Horse, work
Hunting falcon
Ornamental koi carp
Song bird
Water buffalo

Ceremonial and Communication
Books
Brushes

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Gin

5

8
100
200
50
5

1
8

Mon

50

50

20
10

69

Mon
50

Gin

1

70
10
5
30
50
6
3
1
50

2

3
30
4
1
4
1
2
2
20

1
20
4
2
1
1
1
3
2

50
15

2

1

1

1

Item 
Calligraphy kit
Cosmetics
I-Ching Scrolls
Incense
Ink
Medicines and bandages
Paint kit
Paper, poetry grade
Paper, standard
Tea
Tea ceremony kit

Food and Drink
Eel
Fruit brandy, barrel
Fruit brandy, cup
Fruit brandy, ﬂask
Lobster
Noodles, bowl
Octopus
Rice, balls
Rice, bowl
Rice, cakes
Rice, sack
Sake, barrel
Sake, cup
Sake, ﬂask
Shellﬁsh
Shrimp
Soup, ﬁsh
Soup, mizo
Soup, vegetable
Squid
Vegetables (various, seasonal)

Musical Instruments
Biwa (lute)
Drums
Flute, bamboo
Koto (banjo)

70
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Item 
Tools and Craft
Abacus
Armourer’s kit
Bowyer’s kit
Bucket, wooden
Carpentry tools
Fan, signalling/war
Fan, standard
Gardening tools
Purse

Travel and Transport
Backpack
Basket
Boat, ﬁshing
Boat, junk
Boat, river
Item 
Flint and steel
Lantern
Palanquin
Provision bag
Rice bag
Shoulder bag
Torch
Travelling trunk
Water bottle (bamboo)

Weapons

Mon

Gin

2
2

1

3
200
20
Gin

20

5

5

90
30
10
10

10
6

Mon
15
20

20
3
15
2
100
3

Melee Weapons
Bo: The Japanese equivalent of a quarterstaff. A bo is typically made of hardwood, bound with 
bamboo, and lacquered. It is a favoured weapon of monks.

Jo: A shorter version of the bo, which can be wielded in one hand. Skilled users can use a jo in 
either hand to deliver a series of strikes and parries.

Katana:  Most  famous  of  the  samurai  swords  but  by  no  means  ubiquitous,  the  katana  is  a 
viciously sharp weapon that can slice through ﬂesh like a razor. With a longer hilt wrapped in 
cloth or leather, the katana can be equally wielded in one hand or two. Although vicious when 
striking ﬂesh, armour holds a problem for the easily deﬂected edge of folded blades, meaning 
that any target struck gains a +2 bonus to its non-natural Armour Points against katana attacks.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

71

Naginata: This is a thick-hafted polearm with a curved, axe-like blade at its very tip, often with 
a notched or wavy blade. It is traditionally decorated and polished, making it as beautiful as it is 
deadly. The naginata can be used like a chopping axe or a thrusting polearm, cleaving through 
targets easily enough either way. 

Ninja-to: A shorter, straight-bladed version of the folded metal blade with a wider hilt guard, 
the ninja-to is often thought of as an assassin’s weapon because it is quick and deadly. Just like 
its larger, curved cousins, the ninja-to has all the beneﬁts and drawbacks of folded metal blades, 
meaning that any target struck gains a +2 bonus to its non-natural Armour Points against ninja-
to attacks. Many ninja-to swords have hollowed hilts that can hold a small (less than 1 ENC) 
item and have their blades painted black with grease or charcoal to decrease any shine they may 
give off.

No-Dachi: The no-dachi is the largest of the folded metal swords being as long as two metres 
and  is  usually  worn  slung  across  the  back.  It  has  a  curved  blade  like  its  smaller  brother,  the 
katana and is a heavy weapon to use. Requiring that the user assume a low stance and set his 
hands wide on the hilt, the no-dachi can be thrust forward at an approaching foe. This stabbing 
method is the no-dachi swordsman’s answer to a lack of swinging room or to the fast approach 
of cavalry. Just like its smaller cousins, the no-dachi has all the beneﬁts and drawbacks of folded 
metal blades, meaning that any target struck gains a +2 bonus to its non-natural Armour Points 
against no-dachi attacks.

Ono (Masa-kari): The Ono, is a Japanese axe, the weapon version is nearly six feet long. It 
is often used by warrior monks. The military version of the Ono is extremely rare. It is often 
described  as  having  a  ‘large  head  with  a  convex  cutting  edge  and  a  large  scroll  shaped  peen 
opposite.’

Sai: Simple in design, the sai is a dagger-like weapon that does not actually carry an edge except 
at the last bit of the tip of its three prongs. Unlike a knife wielder, a sai ﬁghter will only use the 
very tip of the central prong to drag shallow furrows in the ﬂesh when slashing – though the 
weapon is far deadlier when driven deep enough into the wound to sink the other two prongs 
into the target as well. When performing a stabbing attack that is not Evaded or Parried (no 
Combat Reaction called against the attack) a sai ﬁghter inﬂicts an additional +2 damage. Also, 
the three-pronged design of the sai allows it to turn bladed weapons away quite easily, adding 
+5% to Parry tests against swords, knives and axes.

Tachi:  Slightly  longer  and  heavier  than  the  katana  but  crafted  in  the  same  way,  the  tachi  is 
the favoured war sword of the samurai. It is worn slung from the waist, with the blade facing 
downwards and requires two hands to draw. It is traditionally used with two hands, although it 
can be used with one hand only. Although vicious when striking ﬂesh, armour holds a problem 
for the easily deﬂected edge of folded blades, meaning that any target struck gains a +2 bonus to 
its non-natural Armour Points against katana attacks.

Tanto: The smallest of the folded metal blades, the tanto is slightly larger than a dagger and 
comes in curved or straight-bladed varieties. It has a sharply angled edge to the front and is 
primarily a stabbing weapon, however it is just as sharp as its larger cousins. It is traditionally a 

72
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

weapon used to dispatch a fallen foe or comrade or even oneself. 
Just like its larger brethren, the tanto has all the beneﬁts and 
drawbacks of folded metal blades, meaning that any target 
struck gains a +2 bonus to its non-natural Armour Points 
against tanto attacks.

Tetsubo:  This  weapon  is  attributed  to  large  barbarians 
who once used sapling trees to make it, as it is amongst the 
largest of the bludgeoning implements carried by normal 
men. The tetsubo is a two metre long shaft of wood (or 
sometimes metal) that is thin and leather-wrapped at the 
haft.  At  the  opposite  end  it  is  often  as  thick  as  a  man’s 
leg, giving the whole weapon the appearance of a gigantic 
club. The entire length of the weapon is then covered in 
strips of studded metal running lengthwise from the top 
to the leather wrappings, adding weight and impact to the 
already  huge  weapon.  Due  to  its  size,  the  tetsubo  has  a 
–10% penalty to Parry attempts made by and against it.

Tonfa: A simple baton with a crossbar, the wooden tonfa 
was originally used as a way to augment monastic ﬁghting 
styles without endangering the monks’ holiness by using 
conventional  weaponry.  A  tonfa  can  be  spun  rapidly 
around its crossbar and can be used for attacking rapidly 
and without relent. 

Wakazashi:  The  ‘shortsword’  of  the  folded  metal 
blades,  a  wakazashi  is  the  traditional  secondary 
weapon  of  folded  metal  sword  duellists.  It  is  not 
quite as long as a man’s arm and has a slight curve 
to  the  blade  that  matches  that  of  a  katana  or  no-
dachi.  Using  a  wakazashi  is  often  viewed  as  a  less 
honourable  resort,  meaning  that  the  wielder  must 
have  lost  or  broken  his  primary  weapon  if  he  draws 
the wakazashi at all. Like other weapons of its kind, the 
wakazashi has all the beneﬁts and drawbacks of folded metal 
blades, meaning that any target struck gains a +2 bonus to its 
non-natural Armour Points against wakazashi attacks.

Yari: The Japanese longspear. A straight, one metre long, two-
edged blade, of the same high-quality construction as a sword 
blade, is ﬁxed to a two-metre long shaft. The shaft is traditionally 
bound with bamboo strips and then lacquered for durability.

A quick note about weapons in Samurai of Legend; unless otherwise 
stated, due to Japanese sword making techniques and their skill, the 
weapons in this book override weapons from Legend and Arms of Legend.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Close Combat Weapons

Weapon

Skill

Bo

Jo

Bojutsu

Bojutsu

Katana

Kenjutsu (1H 
or 2H)

7/7

Damage Dice STR/DEX ENC
1D8, Stun 
Location
1D6, Stun 
Location
1D10+1, Bleed, 
Impale
1D10+2

11/10
9/9

7/–

2

1

2

Ono 
(Masa-kari)

Masakarijutsu 2D6+1, Bleed

13/9

Naginata Naginatajutsu

Ninja-to

Kenjutsu (1H 
or 2H)

No-
Dachi

Kenjutsu (2H)

Nunchaku Kamajutsu

Sai

Tantojutsu

Tachi

Kenjutsu (1H 
or 2H)

Tanto

Tantojutsu

Tetsubo

2H Hammer

Tonfa

1H Hammer

2D8, Bleed, 
Impale
1D10
1D6+2, Bleed, 
Impale
1D8+1

11/7
10/9

10/9
7/9

2D8+1, Bleed, 
Impale
1D4+1, 
Entangle, 
Stun Location
1D4+1, Pin 
Weapon
1D10+1, Bleed, 
Impale
1D10+2
1D6, Bleed, 
Impale
2D8, Stun 
Location
1D4+1, Stun 
Location

12/10

7/13

–/9

11/10
9/9

–/–

12/–

–/9

Yari

Sojutsu

1D10, Impale

5/5

Wakazashi Kenjutsu (1H)

1D8, Bleed, 
Impale

–/9

2

3

1

3

–

1

2

–

4

–

2

1

AP/
HP  Size Reach Cost

3/8

 M L

1 gin

2/4

 S M

50 mon

5/10  M M

250 gin

3/10  M M

60 gin

4/12  L

VL

50 gin

5/8

 M M

Cannot 
be 
bought.

5/12  H L

425 gin

3/5

 M S

100 
mon

3/8

 S M

6 gin

5/11  L M

200 gin

5/5

 S

S

60 gin

4/12  H L

30 gin

2/8

 M M

10 gin

3/10  L

VL

45 gin

5/8

 S

S

125 gin

Ranged Weapons
Dai kyu
The Japanese longbow and foremost war-weapon of the Heian samurai. The dai kyu is two and 
a half metres long and can take two men to string it. It is made from laminations of deciduous 

74
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

wood and bamboo, reinforced with rattan twine and then lacquered. Designed to be used from 
the saddle, the bow is ﬁred from a third of the way up its length, with the archer’s arms held at a 
higher level of elevation than for western bows.

Han kyu
A shorter bow than the dai kyu, it is, nevertheless, an excellent hunting weapon and weapon for 
Ryomin ladies.

Shinobi-kyu
The collapsible short bow of the ninja. It resembles a han kyu in all respects.

Yari-Nage
The shortened, javelin-like version of the yari.

Ranged Weapons

Weapon
Dai kyu

Han kyu

Skill
Kyujutsu, 
Yabusame
Kyujutsu 1D8+1, 

Damage Dice Range Load STR/DEX Enc AP/HP
2D8+1, 
Impale

180m 1

13/12

70m 1

9/11

Shinobi-kyu Kyujutsu 1D8, Impale

65m 1

9/11

Impale

Yari-Nage

Sojutsu or 
Throwing

1D6, Impale, 
Pin Weapon 
(Shield)

40m 1

5/9

 
 Size Cost
 H 350 gin

 L

150 gin

 L

Cannot 
be 
bought
 H 30 gin

1

2/7

1

1

1

2/4

2/3

1/8

Arrows

There are two, specialist arrow types used by the samurai, with differing implications for the 
effectiveness of the kyu attack and damage.

Hummingbulb (Hiki-me)
Used as a signalling arrow, the bulb is perforated and emits a warbling, high-pitched whistle as it 
ﬂies. The release of a humming bulb usually signals the start of a battle or arrow duel.

Kyu effects: –2 to damage
Cost: 50 mon each

Bowel Raker (Watakushi)
A barbed arrow with the barbs curving out on either side of the arrow head and towards the 
point. These nasty arrows inﬂict terrible wounds but at a slight expense to range and aim due to 
their heavy, less stable nature.

Kyu effects: +2 to damage, –10m to range, –10% to Kyujutsu/Yabasume test.
Cost: 70 mon each

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

75

religion and faith

The Japanese are a deeply religious people, able to relate to their surroundings through the two 
religions of Buddhism and Shinto. The former is by far the newer religion, having come to Japan 
in the mid 6th Century, whereas the latter, Shinto, has existed for far, far longer. The two faiths 
share many similar concepts, hence their ability to co-exist but are still very different in outlook 
and expression. This chapter explores the two religions and provides mechanics for integrating 
them into Samurai of Legend games.

Magic
In  Samurai  of  Legend  both  religions  are  capable  of  working  magic  and  this  is  discussed  in 
more detail in the Magic of Japan chapter. However if a purely historical version of Japan is 
preferred, simply ignore all references to magic use. It need not form a part of your campaign.

Purity

Of prime importance to both Buddhism and Shinto is the notion of Purity. In game terms Purity 
is rated on a scale from 1 to 100 and beyond and is treated very much like a skill, although in 
different ways for each religion. For Buddhists, it is a measure of how far one is on the path to 
enlightenment. For Shinto priests, it is a measure of how much pollution has been avoided. The 
mechanics for Purity are discussed in more detail for each religion but every priest character, 
whether Buddhist or Shinto, begins with a Purity value of 10+POW+CHA.

Purity can be increased in two ways. First, it can be increased as per any other skill, representing 
a character’s general adherence to his faith outside the game session. Second, at the end of each 
game session, Games Masters should award priest characters with between 0 and 10 points of 
Purity, depending on how well or how far the character has remained true to the precepts of his 
faith during game play.

Purity, like On, can also be lost. The losses are slightly different for each faith but if a character 
makes  a  particular  transgression  for  his  faith,  the  Purity  loss  is  immediate  and  automatic.  It 
cannot be mitigated against through the use of Hero Points, as can loss of On and atonement 
must come through subsequent action, hopefully resulting in a reasonable Purity award at the 
end of the session.

If Purity falls to zero or below, then the priest suffers an immediate crisis of conscience and must 
make a Persistence test. If the priest fails the ﬁrst Persistence test, he is unable to contemplate 
any other activities save for atonement and immediately goes off in search of it, irrespective of 
his present circumstances or those of his colleagues.

76
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

If the test is successful the priest is able to emotionally handle his predicament for the time being 
but  will  seek  to  atone  for  his  transgressions  at  the  earliest  opportunity,  through  meditation, 
prayer  at  the  nearest  shrine  or  temple  and  so  forth.  He  must  spend  at  least  one  day  and  a 
number of days equal to his negative Purity, in such atonement. At the end of this period, he 
makes a second Persistence test. If the test is successful, his Purity is restored to a value equal 
to POW+CHA. If the test is a critical success, Purity is restored to 10+POW+CHA. If the test 
fails, he must spend another day in atonement and may then try again. If the test is a fumble, he 
must spend a further number of days equal to the negative purity before being able to make the 
Persistence test once more.

Buddhism

Buddhism  involves  transcending  ignorance  to  attain  Enlightenment.  Ignorance  leads  man  to 
sorrow and suffering; men suffer because they do not know the true nature of things. To receive 
true  knowledge,  therefore,  man  must  learn  to  recognise  illusion  and  reject  the  ignorance  of 
the world about him. Thus, if one attains Enlightenment he will also gain perfect happiness. 
Buddhism  also  is  the  teaching  of  the  bakku  yoraku,  which  means  the  removal  of  suffering 
and the giving of happiness. So, the teaching of Buddhism is the abstention from all bad and 
doing all good. The teaching of the Buddha is to show how to attain Enlightenment – perfect 
wisdom, supreme good and highest happiness in the perfect realisation of personality. To reach 
Enlightenment one must ﬁrst lead a good and pure life, establishing good karma. Unless good 
karma is fully attained, Enlightenment is impossible and one is trapped in a cycle of birth, death 
and rebirth. All Buddhists accept that they are part of this cycle and that attaining Enlightenment 
is a lengthy road to travel. Therefore, each Buddhist must lead as pure and as good a life as 
possible in order to hasten enlightenment and be ﬁnally reborn as a Buddha.

There are 10 cardinal precepts of Buddhism known as the Juzenkai and all Buddhist sects observe them:

Do not harm life
Do not steal
Do not commit adultery
Do not lie
Do not be abusive
Do not exaggerate
Do not equivocate
Do not be greedy
Do not hate
Do not lose sight of what is true

Those  who diligently and consistently observe and practice the Juzenkai will,  one  day, reach 
enlightenment  and  become  Buddhas,  able  to  pass  on  their  wisdom  and  teachings  to  others. 
There are many Buddhas already and more will be created. It is simply a question of leading a 
good and pure life and escaping the attraction of bad karma.

The  teachings  of  Buddhism  are  contained  in  the  sutras  and  all  Buddhist  priests  have  a  duty 
to disseminate the sutras through preaching and through setting an example to others. Thus, 
wandering Buddhist priests, staff in hand, wearing simple clothing and unshackled by worldly 
possessions, are a common sight on Japan’s roads and paths. Conversely Japan has many temples 
housing thousands of permanent priests and monks who remove themselves from general society 
in order to devote themselves to the study of the sutras and practicing of mantras (prayers) to 
help them reach a greater sense of spiritual understanding and purpose.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

77

The Buddhas
Buddhas are those who have attained enlightenment and passed on to nirvana, having exited the 
earthly cycle of birth, death and rebirth. There are many Buddhas, some borrowed from Shinto, 
called Nyorai and they fall into the following rough categories.
Bosatsu
Mortals who have attained enlightenment but remain in the mortal realm to teach others.
Deities
The heavenly gods of Buddhism representing truth and enlightenment in various forms.

Amida
The keeper of paradise, Amida is revered as one of the highest, if not the highest of the Buddhas. 
Following his teachings and examples and sometimes even simply chanting his name, is enough 
to enter paradise.

Enma O
Enma O guards the entrance to hell and judges the souls of the dead, deciding the fate of the soul 
– either being reborn into the world, being conﬁned to hell to atone for bad karma or returning 
as a spirit in order to repay a debt.

Hachiman
Originally the son of the Empress Jingu, Hachiman is revered as both a Buddha and as a Shinto 
deity. He is a god of war but also revered by farmers and ﬁshermen as he blesses them with good 
harvests and catches.

Inari
Both  a  Buddhist  and  Shinto  god,  Inari  is  represented  as  both  male  and  female  and  is  often 
associated with the fox and the fox spirits or kitsune. Inari offers blessings to the rice crop and 
is seen as a mischievous, sometimes troublesome god, who, nevertheless, has good intentions 
at heart. Worship of Inari becomes popular during the Heian period, especially in the Imperial 
Court.

Jizo
A patron of travelers and the souls of the dead, his statues are a common sight, especially by 
roadsides and in graveyards. Jizo is seen as the guardian of children, particularly children who 
died before their parents.

Go-Chi
The Contemplative Buddhas: Taho, Yakushi, Dainichi, Askuku and Shaka.

The Myo-o
The  vengeful  or  protector  Buddhas  who  are  permitted  to  work  violence,  when  the  occasion 
demands it, in order to preserve the harmony of the universe. These are wrathful beings with 
phenomenal powers over the elements: there are ﬁve Myo-o: Daiitoku, Fudo, Gozanze, Gundari 
and Kongo-Yasha and they protect the four directions from evil inﬂuences.

Daiitoku
Represented as having six faces, six arms and six legs, haloed by ﬁre and carrying a variety of 
weapons, Daiitoku is sometimes pictured as riding on a great bull. When sculptures of him are 
found in temples, he always faces to the west.

78
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Fudo
The  best  known  of  the  Myo-o,  Fudo  is  depicted  as  a  ﬁerce,  strong,  dark-skinned  warrior, 
encircled with ﬂames, bearing the sword kurikara, which can defeat demons and ropes in the 
other hand, with which he captures and binds demons and the souls of those who cannot be 
redeemed. Fudo protects the centre.

Gozanze
Sometimes depicted as female, Gozanze protects the east and is often shown as having three faces 
and six arms, trampling demons and evil spirits underfoot.

Gundari
Protecting the south against devils within and without, Gundari wears a fearsome expression and is 
depicted as having three eyes and eight arms. Snakes are frequently shown wrapping around his ankles.

Kongo-Yasha
Protecting  the  north,  Kongo-Yasha  is  depicted  with  three  heads  and  six  arms,  a  wrathful 
expression on his distorted face.

San Senjin
The  war  gods  of  Buddhism,  always  depicted  as  ﬁerce  warriors  wearing  Chinese  armour  and 
carrying Chinese weapons.

Bishamonten
A god of warriors, healing and wealth, Bishamonten is depicted as carrying a sword in one hand 
and  a  pagoda  in  the  other,  from  which  he  dispenses  wealth.  Bishamonten  is  a  favoured  god 
amongst the sohei.

Daikokuten
As well as being of a god of war (pictured holding an immense mallet), Daikokuten is also a god 
of farmers and one who dispenses wealth to them.

Marishiten
Depicted as having several faces and several arms (numbers of faces and limbs vary), Marishiten 
is considered a personiﬁcation of the divine light and is revered by warriors for her ability to 
become invisible or generate mirages, so that enemies can be evaded or made confused. She, 
again, is seen as a dispenser of prosperity and is revered by merchants.

Shi Daitenno
The four heavenly kings guard the four directions: Jikoku guards the east, Komoku the west, 
Tamon the north and Zocho the south. All four are depicted as warriors with a variety of forms 
and usually dressed in a Chinese style.

Buddhist Sects
In  the  Heian  period  there  are  two  principal  Buddhist  sects:  Shingon  and Tendai.  Both  sects 
revere the Buddhas but differ in how their teachings are to be studied and in how enlightenment 
is be attained.

Shingon Buddhism
Developed by Kukai, Shingon Buddhism is an esoteric sect with involved, difﬁcult to comprehend 
rituals and doctrines. Shingon devotees practice the study of mantras and mandalas in a bid to 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

79

understand the truth of enlightenment and thereby attain true reason and wisdom. Amida is the 
venerated deity but the heart of the sect is Dainichi and his teachings regarding contemplation 
and reﬂection to achieve wisdom. All Shingon practice meditation and the drawing and study 
of  complex  mandalas  that  are  considered  to  be  expressions  of  truth  and  enlightenment. The 
Shingon Buddhists believe that enlightenment is not a distant ideal but something everyone is 
capable of achieving given the right depth of study and understanding. 

Tendai Buddhism
Founded  by  Saicho, Tendai  Buddhism  believes  in  Original  Enlightenment  (Hongaku  shiso) 
– the idea that all beings are originally or inherently enlightened and that freedom from the 
earthly form is possible if the inner wisdom is awoken and the delusions that hide true nature 
are dispelled. The concept of Original Enlightenment is rooted in the central Buddhist belief 
that everything is interconnected and for this reason Tendai Buddhism has been able to easily 
reconcile itself with Shinto beliefs and practices.

The centre of the Tendai sect is the major temple Enryaku-ji, close to Heiankyo, on Mount Hiei.
Buddhism and Purity
Buddhists aim to live and lead good lives, thereby creating for themselves good karma, which 
leads  to  enlightenment.  Bad  karma  is  anything  that  breaks  the  10  precepts  of  Buddhism  as 
outlined earlier. For the purposes of Samurai of Legend, Purity is a measure of how much good 
karma a devotee has accumulated.

Acts considered bad karma lower the Purity value, as outlined below:

Bad Karma Penalties
Bad Karma Action
Causing harm to life
Lying
Stealing
Committing adultery
Exaggerating
Equivocating
Being abusive or insulting
Being greedy
Accepting falsehood

Effect on Purity
–30
–20
–20
–20
–15
–15
–20
–20
–30

Temples

As the various sects of Buddhism developed, so did schisms of political and idelogical belief. The 
temples of Nara, the former capital, resented the growth of the new temples close to Heiankyo 
and this resentment ultimately degenerated into outright violence throughout the Heian period. 
The temples, to defend themselves, developed their own standing armies of sohei warriors and 
took steps to fortify, particularly those of Nara which lacked the natural defences of a mountain. 
Also, such was the popularity of Buddhism, many temples attracted thousands of devotees from 
all casts and classes. The singular temples of Enryaku-ji and Kofukuji rapidly become large, self-
supporting enclaves known as jinaimachi or ‘temple towns’. The traditional jinaimachi model is 
based on a clear segregation between the sacred functions of the temple and those required for 
daily living. With such large bodies of people living and worshipping in the temple complex it is 
important to retain these distinctions, as much for spiritual reasons as for practical ones.

80
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Major temples are entered by way of a ceremonial gate. The gate is both a spiritual and physical 
ingress and as such may or may not have defensive gates, depending on the temple’s position, 
importance  and  how  often  it  has  been  assaulted  before  (if  at  all).  On  either  side  of  the  gate 
are Nio statues, huge carved ediﬁces of Buddhist protector gods designed to intimidate those 
considering trouble. It is traditional for one Nio to have its mouth open whilst the mouth of the 
other is closed. The Nio also provide a ﬁrst line of magical defence, with alarm or defensive spells 
permanently cast upon them.

Beyond  the  gate  is  the  courtyard,  surrounded  by  sturdy  temple  timber  buildings  atop  stone 
terraces. The interior of each building is based upon thick vertical support beams with large 
crossbeams for the upper storeys. The focus of the courtyard buildings is the hondo. The hondo 
has eaves protecting an external walkway that runs around the perimeter of the building and its 
doors are the traditional Japanese sliding paper doors or shoji. The hondo is given over to the 
main Buddhas revered by the temple and the images of these deities occupy the hondo’s central 
area. Smaller Nio occupy the corners of the main area and these Nio are usually the Myo-O gods, 
protecting the four directions. Around the main area are spaces for priests to perform services 
and  engage  in  private  contemplation,  sometimes  with  shoji  to  provide  some  privacy  and  to 
screen the central images of the Buddhas from the outside, if so needed.

Around the courtyard it is typical to ﬁnd lanterns of all shapes and sizes, lit when it begins to get 
dark and pagodas, especially in the older temples of Nara. Pagodas are used to hold the remains 
of Buddhas as relics but in Japan are there more to symbolise the holiness of the temple and mark 
its stature. Another common feature of the courtyard is the bell tower, an open wooden structure 
housing a bronze bell that is struck with an external clapper, slung from a support beam and 
struck against the bell with a rope.

If the temple is also a monastery and most jinaimachi are, then around the courtyard are buildings 
for lectures, the learning of the sutras and small shrines for private meditation. It is also common 
to ﬁnd a Shinto shrine to the local kami and offerings are made here by both Buddhists and 
Shinto worshippers, such is the accord between the two faiths.

Beyond the courtyard but still within the precincts of the jinaimachi are dwellings, workshops, 
gardens and vegetable plots. At its height, Enryaku-ji has some 2,000 separate buildings scattered 
across  the  summit  of  Mount  Hiei,  connected  via  a  network  of  paths  through  the  trees  and 
into the many small valleys. Other temples and monasteries follow a similar structure, being 
completely self-sufﬁcient communities. Sohei have their own quarters away from the priests and 
traditional monks but worship in the main area. In their own quarters the sohei maintain areas 
for training, weapon practice and worship.

In  Shingon  temples  in  particular,  much  importance  is  placed  on  secrecy  and  privacy.  The 
esoteric nature of Shingon means that priests progress gradually through a series of secret rituals 
conveying the innermost knowledge of Buddhism. In some temples these rituals involve magical 
and  mystical  practices  and  some  even  involve  the  use  of  ﬁre  as  a  way  of  attaining  purity  of 
consciousness. The yamabushi followers of Shugendo perfected the practice of walking across 
red-hot coals to demonstrate their ability to transcend the material world. In these temples the 
areas used for sacred, secret ritual are separated from the common areas of worship and even 
protected by sohei guards.

Worship
Worship practices vary from sect to sect but usually involve group worship at particular times 
of the day, especially sunrise. Group worship typically includes the recital of the sutras, with the 
priests and monks seated in the hondo. This is followed by walking meditation, either around 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

81

the courtyard or the hondo’s perimeter walkway and then by private meditation in the hondo 
and other temple buildings. After that, the monks work, the sohei practice and the priests turn 
to their esoteric studies, punctuated by further prayer, meditation and if it is part of their sect, 
secret study of the teachings that form part of the sect’s rituals.

Holy Days
Buddhists celebrate several matsuri or holy days/festival days in their calendar. As well as these 
speciﬁc matsuri, the Shinto matsuri are also frequently observed.

Ganjitsu (New Year). This three day festival cleanses the nation as a whole for the forthcoming 
year as the Emperor (or his Regent) leads the puriﬁcation rites.

Hanamatsuri  (March-April).  This  day  celebrates  the  birthday  of  Buddha  but  all  Buddhas  are 
honoured. It is also the Flower Festival, in which people gather to view the cherry blossom and 
divine the state of the year’s rice harvest.

O-bon (July). A festival of the dead, in which the ancestors of the family are honoured in the 
home and in the temples with the reading of sutras and the preparation of various offerings, such 
as small bowls of food and sake, a clean bed of straw.

Kanname-sai (October). The harvest festival, when Inari is honoured for blessing the rice crop.

Using the Faction Rules for Buddhists
Buddhist temples are arranged into different ranks, with the newly ordained priests occupying 
the  position  of  Initiate.  Acolytes  form  the  bulk  of  the  priesthood,  ranked  according  to  their 
Purity and Lore (Speciﬁc Theology) skill rating. Above the Acolytes are the High Priests, again 
with their own ranks based on a similar measure to the Acolytes. At the head is the Abbot or 
Zasu, who leads the temple with the assistance of the higher ranking High Priests.

The  cult  requirements  outlined  on  page  209  of  the  Legend  Core  Rulebook  serve  acceptably  for 
measuring progress in the Buddhist temple. 

Any sohei who fulﬁls the requirements may take the title Dai-sohei and will be expected to fulﬁl 
similar duties in the service of his temple. Even the most honoured Dai-sohei answer to the Zasu.

Buddhist Sect Skills and Magic
Temples offer training in a wide range of skills in the same way as any other Legend cult, especially 
in the jinaimachi. Skills offered depend on the sect, although Divine magic tends to be common 
across all sects because although the sects differ philosophically, the same deities are venerated.

Magic
All  Buddhist  priests,  monks  and  sohei  can  pray  for  Divine  spells  at  any  Buddhist  temple 
belonging to their sect. Limitations for rank in the sect are applied as described on page 211 
of the Legend Core Rulebook. Buddhist sects also teach the Ki abilities (see the Magic of Japan 
chapter) listed below.

Calling for Divine Intervention is possible but the circumstances must be extreme and if the 
Buddhist deities offer assistance it is likely to be as a subtle demonstration of their powers rather 
than as an overt manifestation of a Buddha or Myo-O.

82
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Shingon Priest and Monk Skills
Art,  Athletics,  Divination,  Lore  (Shingon  Theology),  Martial  Arts,  Meditate,  Perception, 
Persistence, Resilience. Ki Abilities: Destiny Map, Life Giver, Loremaster

Shingon Sohei Skills
Athletics, Courtesy, Lore (Shingon Theology), Martial Arts, Meditate, Polearm (Naginatajutsu). 
Ki Abilities: Avoidance, Battle Fury, Perfect Blow

Tendai Priest and Monk Skills
Athletics, Lore (Inner Wisdom), Lore (Shinto Theology), Lore (Tendai Theology), Meditate, 
Oratory, Perception, Persistence, Resilience. Ki Abilities: Soothsay, Tireless, True Sight

Tendai Sohei Skills
Athletics,  Lore  (Inner  Wisdom),  Lore  (Shingon Theology),  Martial  Arts,  Meditate,  Polearm 
(Naginatajutsu). Ki Abilities: Perfect Blow, Storm of 1,000 Blows, Sundering Stroke.

Shinto

Shinto is Japan’s indigenous religion although Buddhism, in the Heian period, has displaced it 
as the state religion. Shinto believes that all things possess a spirit, awareness and presence in the 
world and these are called kami. Anything or anyone can be a kami, if they are pure and if they 
engender feelings of beauty and awe in those who behold them. Thus, the Emperor is revered as a 
kami and so are great heroes and even clan heads. The humblest rock or stream has its own kami 
and the great natural features, such as the mountains, the sun and the moon are major kami – 
deities with great power and inﬂuence.

Despite  being  in  Buddhism’s  shadow,  Shinto  still  permeates  Japanese  belief  and  even  the 
Buddhist sects agree that the kami exist and should be honoured. Shinto has few great temples 
but thousands of shrines across the country, built to revere the local kami and the major kami 
of a particular region. The Heavenly deities, such as Amerterasu, Izanami and Izagami, are not 
worshipped directly but venerated at the Grand Shrine of Ise, the holiest of all Shinto places.

For most part, worship of the kami is conducted locally and relatively informally. Shinto priests 
are not seeking any particular enlightenment, as Buddhists are but they do seek to uphold certain 
values that are deemed important to life and Japanese civilisation. In essence these values equate 
to avoidance of sin, of which there are two types: Amatsu-Tsumi and Kunitsu-Tsumi. 

Amatsu-Tsumi  are  those  sins  committed  by  Susano’o-no  Mikoto,  the  brother  of  Amaterasu, 
involving  the  destruction  of  crops  and  things  precious  to  life  and  were  levelled  against  the 
festivals of thanksgiving. Thus, destruction of almost any kind is a sin in Shinto and a sin of the 
most powerful kind.

Kunitsu-Tsumi sins are those typically enshrined in Japanese criminal law and include injury, 
murder (especially infanticide), incest, poisoning, cursing and the learning of magic. Kunitsu-
Tsumi also includes natural hazards, such as thunderstorms, tsunami and other hazards brought 
about by birds, reptiles and insects. Essentially anything that threatens the community is sinful 
and must be avoided. In the case of natural hazards, sin is avoided by observing the festivals, the 
matsuri and venerating the local kami who protect the community and nature equally. Failure 
to do these things costs purity.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

83

The Shinto Deities
There  are  countless  deities.  However,  the  major  kami,  venerated  at  the  Grand  Shrine,  are  as 
follows:
Amaterasu no kami
The sun goodess and most revered of all kami. She is the daughter of Izanagi who, with her 
brothers Susano’o and Tsukuyomi, lived a harmonious existence. When Susano’o commited the 
Amatsu-Tsumi sins, Amaterasu locked herself away in a deep cave, sealing it with a large rock. 
Light was taken from the world and all began to whither and die. Eight million kami came to 
the cave where she had locked herself and devised a way to lure her from hiding. First, the kami 
set up a mirror opposite the cave’s entrance. Then, Ame-no-Uzume, the kami of merriment, 
performed a sensual dance on top of an upturned washtub, tapping the beat on the rim. The rest 
of the kami cheered and applauded the dance, making such a noise that Amaterasu’s curiosity 
was too much and she peeked out from the cave to see what the commotion was about. One 
of the kami explained to Amaterasu that they were welcoming a new goddess; Amaterasu asked 
who she was and the kami pointed to the mirror. Amaterasu had never seen her own reﬂection 
and when she saw her own radiance reﬂected back at her, she declared that the new goddess was 
indeed beautiful and fascinating. Slowly, Amaterasu emerged from the cave to gaze upon this 
new arrival and when she had emerged the kami Tajikara-O closed the cave with the rock behind 
her. Once out in the world again, Amaterasu was persuaded to return to the celestial plain and 
return light to the world, which she did. She resolved to face her willful brother’s actions in 
future and not to hide from them.

Hachiman
The god of war, Hachiman is revered as the Emperor Ojin of the 4th Century and known as the 
God of Eight Banners, which marked the Emperor Ojin’s birth. His symbol is the dove and as 
the Protector of Japan his worship is widespread with countless small shrines existing in addition 
to the larger shrine at Ise. A patron kami of samurai and peasants alike, he is also the patron kami 
of the Minamoto clan and all samurai in their employ hold reverence for him.

Inari
Worshipped by Buddhists and Shinto, Inari is the sometimes mischievous kami of crops that 
takes either male or female form and is associated closely with the kitsune fox spirits. Foxes are 
considered  Inari’s  creatures  and  with  their  slyness  and  cunning,  are  seen  as  embodiments  of 
Inari’s spirit.

Izanagi
One of the creator deities, Izanagi created the world through stirring the primordial essence with 
his spear and letting the droplets form the ﬁrst islands. After he lost Izanami to the underworld, 
Izanagi created the ﬁrst cleansing rituals, washing ﬁrst his left eye, which resulted in the birth of 
Amaterasu. Next he washed his right eye, creating Tsukuyomi, the god of the moon and ﬁnally, 
his nose, which created Susano’o, the storm god.

Izanami
One of the creator deities, Izanami is the wife and sister of Izanagi and the mother of all kami. 
Izanami died giving birth to Kagutsuchi, the kami of ﬁre and was sent to the underworld, where 
she chose to remain. When Izanagi went to bring her back, she refused and in a rage, Izanagi 
vowed to kill 1,000 of her subjects each day. Izanami countered this threat with a promise to 
create 1,500 to replace them.

84
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Suitengu
A child-kami of the sea, worshipped by ﬁshermen and sailors.

Susano’o
Susano’o  is  the  storm  god  and  banished  from  Heaven  for  committing  the  ﬁrst  sins  against 
his sister, Amaterasu and causing her to hide, thus depriving the world of the sun. Susano’o 
descended from Heaven to the province of Izumo, where he met an elderly couple who had 
eight daughters. Seven had been eaten by the monster, Yamata no Orochi and the serpent was 
about to claim the eighth daughter. The parents promised Susano’o their daughter’s hand in 
marriage if he agreed to slay Yamata no Orochi. So, taking eight bowls of sake, one for each head 
of the monster, Susano’o used guile to get the monster to drink the sake and then decapitated 
each head once it had fallen asleep. From one of Orochi’s tails, Susano’o pulled out a sword, 
which he named Ame-no-Murakumo-no-Tsurugi (“Heaven’s Cloud-Gathering Sword”). This he 
presented to Amaterasu as a reconciliation gift and it was later given to her descendant, Ninigi, 
along  with  the  Yata-no-Kagami,  the  mirror  and  magatama  the  sacred  jewels,  as  proof  of  his 
divine right to rule. These treaures became the Imperial Regalia, supposedly lost to the sea at the 
end of the Gempei wars.

Tsukuyomi
Leaving Heaven to reside in the sky with his sister, Amaterasu, Tsukuyomi was responsible for 
killing Uke Mochi, the goddess of food. This angered Amaterasu because she had sent Tsukuyomi 
to represent her at a feast arranged by Uke Mochi and it was thus a great insult, not to mention a 
sin. Uke Mochi incurred Tsukuyomi’s wrath in the way she prepared the food for the feast. First, 
she turned herself into the ocean and spat out a ﬁsh. Next, she made game animals came out of 
her mouth; ﬁnally, she turned herself into a rice paddy and created a bowl of rice by coughing 
it forth. Whilst the quality of the feast was good, Tsukuyomi was utterly disgusted by the way it 
had been made and killed the kami as a punishment.

When  Amaterasu  learned  what  happened  she  was  so  angry  that  she  refused  to  ever  look  at 
Tsukuyomi  again  and  moved  to  another  part  of  the  sky  –  hence  the  reason  for  the  division 
between the daytime realm of the sun and the night time realm of the moon.

Other Kami
Kami come in major and minor forms. All things possess a spirit and so all spirits can manifest 
as  a  kami.  Major  kami  are  considered  important  deities  reﬂected  in  their  power  and  sphere 
of inﬂuence. Minor kami represent the elements (air, earth, ﬁre, water and wood), as well as 
particular  locales  and  revered  ancestors.  Important  major  kami  include  Mount  Hiei,  Mount 
Fujiyama, Lake Biwa, the Emperor himself and any large, powerful or impressive natural feature 
that exudes an innate power over the landscape and lends shape to the communities dwelling in 
its shadow.

The powers of kami are discussed in further detail in the Magic of Japan chapter.

Shinto Purity
Purity  is  of  particular  importance  to  Shinto  priests;  any  spiritual  impurity  incurred  through 
sin reduces the priest’s ability to commune with and petition, the kami. Whilst most kami are 
benign, Shinto priests also know that they can be capricious beings and only those who can 
demonstrate an acceptable level of purity are likely to be able to persuade a kami to do something.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

85

The table below summarises the penalties for incurring different forms of pollution, which itself 
arises from sin. All acts of destruction are considered pollutants, as are acts that physically stain 
the body, such as disease, contagion and blood. Curiously, whilst Shinto is a faith very much 
concerned with life and its value, it takes great pains to avoid the act of child birth, which brings 
life into the world. Midwives and physicians tending pregnant mothers are summoned from the 
Buddhist temple but once the child is born to the world, it is to the Shinto shrine where its is 
taken ﬁrst to be blessed by the kami.

Polluton Penalties
Pollution
Allowing harm to come to crops
Attending or taking part in a funeral or burial
Being present at any birth
Causing a death
Causing an injury
Coming into contact with blood that is not one’s own
Coming into contact with death of any form
Contract any disease or illness
Deﬁling a shrine or allowing a shrine to be deﬁled
Eating meat (including ﬁsh)
Fumble a Purity test when petitioning a kami
Telling a deliberate lie
Offending or speaking ill of any kami

Effect on Purity
–20
–20
–20
–30
–20
–30
–30
–30
–30
–20
–kami’s POW
–20
–30

Using Purity
Whenever a Shinto priest seeks anything from a kami, be it a simple blessing, a favour or some 
form of magic, the priest makes a Purity test opposed by the kami’s Persistence. Modiﬁers for the 
kind of favour or service being petitioned are applied to the priest’s Purity value before the Skill 
Test is made. If the opposed test is successful; the kami will grant whatever help is being sought. 
If the test fails, the kami’s refusal is assured. If the test is a critical success, then the priest has 
managed to atone and in doing so, may improve his Purity by an amount equal to the kami’s own 
POW Characteristic. If the test is a fumble, then the attempts to appease the kami have failed 
disastrously and the priest suffers a reduction in Purity equal to the kami’s POW.

Purity Test Modifiers
Action
Inﬂuence skill
Sacriﬁcing a Magic Point
Bring an offering of food or sake
Bring an offering of sake
Request a Spirit Magic spell
Request a Divine Magic spell

Modiﬁer
+ critical value of the Inﬂuence skill
+5 for every MP sacriﬁced
+5
+5
–1 for each point of spell Magnitude
–2 for each point of spell Magnitude

Magic Point Sacrifices
Kami love gifts. They especially like personal offerings that are heartfelt and sincere. A priest may 
increase his Purity skill test by sacriﬁcing Magic Points during his petition to the kami. For every 

86
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Magic Point sacriﬁced, the Purity roll gains a bonus of +5%. These Magic Points are expended 
whatever the outcome of the Purity test; kami like gifts but do not always gift back. The points 
sacriﬁced are regained at the usual recovery rate.

Each and every attempt to persuade a kami requires an opposed Purity test. For example, asking 
for a kami to bless a paddy ﬁeld is one request and requires a successful test. Then asking it, a 
moment later, to also bless the harvest requires another test. Even if the ﬁrst test fails, the kami 
might grant the second request; as already said, kami are mercurial beings at the best of times 
and might have their own reasons for granting one request whilst ignoring another. Sometimes a 
denied request might be granted tangentially through a successful petition for something else; it 
all depends on the Purity of the priest and how canny he is in negotiating and making a sacriﬁce 
at an opportune time.

Shinto Shrines

Shrines or jinja, tend to be simple, wood and paper dwellings set into the natural environment 
and reached by a path. It is usual for a traditional torii gate to mark the entrance to the shrine 
but this is not always present. The essence is simplicity; Shinto shrines are never complex or 
ostentatious affairs.

If a shrine is tended by an incumbent priest, his quarters will not be far away and are as simple 
and  straightforward  as  the  shrine  itself.  A  pale  or  well,  with  a  wooden  ladle,  is  available  for 
visitors to rinse their mouths before entering the shrine and as small area for leaving offerings is 
present either within or without the building.

It is very unusual to ﬁnd any sort of statue or idol representing the resident kami. An object 
might be present, such as a polished stone or bough of a tree perhaps but more often than not 
the kami is represented by heihaku - paper or cloth strips attached to a stand, each carrying the 
kami’s name written in kanji.

At the larger shrines, such as Ise and Izumo, the buildings are correspondingly larger and tended 
by resident priests who maintain the shrine and attend to prayer. Living quarters are provided for 
such staff and a public hall or honden, is present for public worship. The personiﬁcations of the 
kami are kept in a smaller, sanctiﬁed hall and are not open to public worshippers.

Worship
The  worship  of  the  kami  is  concerned  with  simplicity  and  respect.  Ceremonies  are  quiet, 
contemplative affairs where the worshipper embraces the kami’s location and enters into a personal 
communion. There are no mantras or displays; simply a very quiet, very peaceful understanding 
of what the kami represents. Only during the large annual matsuri are celebrations more vocal 
and demonstrative. Everyday veneration of the kami is concerned with expressions of gratitude 
in the simplest and most respectful of ways.

There are three simple steps involved in worship. Firstly, the cleansing. Hands are washed and 
the mouth rinsed clean. This is a fundamental mark of respect for the kami and even if the other 
steps are not completed, the cleansing ritual is enough to demonstrate respect.

The second step is an offering of food or less frequently, money, which is used to help maintain 
the shrine. A bowl of rice, ﬁsh or soup is common and a cup of sake is always acceptable. An 
offering is not essential but is deemed respectful.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

87

The third step is a prayer of gratitude, acknowledging the kami’s place and the help it gives. 
Following the prayer, petitions can be made – for the future or for immediate needs. If the kami 
has  been  placated,  it  may  answer,  either  spiritually  and  directly  to  the  petitioner  or  through 
some kind of physical manifestation, either inside the shrine or within the immediate area of 
its concern. Kami can adopt any form they wish but human forms are common, with the kami 
appearing as either a male or female, dressed simply and carrying, sometimes, a symbol of their 
inﬂuence.

Holy Days
The Shinto matsuri are the only times when joyous celebration is allowed at a shrine, although 
even these occasions are respectful and courteous. The major festivals are:

Ganjitsu (New Year). This three day festival cleanses the nation as a whole for the forthcoming 
year as the Emperor (or his Regent) leads the puriﬁcation rites. Celebrated as both a Shinto and 
a Buddhist festival. Everyone visits the local shrine and makes offerings and prayers of gratitude. 
Houses are thoroughly cleaned and elders and superiors are honoured with small tokens.

Setsubun (February). This matsuri marks the end of winter. It is also a time marking the passage 
of children into the state of youth and youth to manhood.

Higan  (March).  Local  kami  across  Japan  are  venerated  formally  at  the  Higan  matsur.  It  also 
marks the spring equinox and the coming of blessed times.

Tsukimi (August – full moon). The honouring of Tsukuyomi.

Iwashimizu (September). This is the matsuri honouring Hachiman, both as an agricultural deity 
and as a god of warriors.

Kanname-sai (October). The harvest festival honouring Inari.

Kami-na-zuki (October). All kami leave their respective shrines and meet at the Izumo Grand 
Shrine to discuss matters personal to them and the state of their realms. Worship of the kami can 
only be conducted at Izumo because there are no gods anywhere else. The name of this festival 
means ‘Month with No Gods’.

Using the Faction Rules for Shinto Priests
Shinto is far less formalised than Buddhism. There are no central tenets, no truly complex rituals 
and no vast temples with ranks of priests ordained into varying degrees of esoteric knowledge. 
Shinto is a simple faith with simple requirements and a simple structure. Priests tend to be lay-
members although some, especially those with responsibility for a shrine, occupy initiate status.

Priests  might  be  compelled  to  act  on  a  kami’s  interests  or  business  but  since  kami  are  rarely 
concerned with the mortal realm, such actions occur only when a kami is directly threatened. 
For the most part priests serve the spiritual needs of the community on a far more casual basis, 
ofﬁciating at marriages, naming ceremonies and matsuri.

88
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Shinto Skills and Magic
As there is nothing approaching a cult structure in Shinto, there is no support mechanism for 
the learning of new skills beyond the ways of the kami and how to venerate them properly. The 
priest for a shrine is able to teach those who worship there the Lore (Speciﬁc Kami) skill for 
the enshrined kami and Lore (Shinto Theology) but little else beyond the skills he himself has 
developed.

Because Shinto priests do not work magic themselves but petition kami to work it for them or 
through them, spells cannot be learned at any shrine.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

89

magic of japan

Samurai of Legend has several forms of magic available to characters, each based on the magic 
systems available in Legend. Priests and monks of the two religions are able to call upon Spirit 
Magic  in  Samurai  of  Legend,  which  varies  from  normal  Spirit  Magic  in  Legend  (see  below) 
and Divine magic which is remains the same. Sorcerers are able to work sorcery, although the 
practice, which bends the natural order and symmetry of the world, is deemed illegal in Japan 
and punishable by death.

The  fourth  kind  of  magic,  explained  below,  is  available  to  all  characters  and  is  not,  strictly 
speaking, magic, although its effects may seem to be so to observers. This is Ki, the ability to call 
upon inner reserves of energy to achieve remarkable feats with a mundane skill. The character is 
able to focus on a particular skill and an associated effect and then channel his hidden reserves of 
power to bring the effect into action.

A Note on Spirit Magic: Spirit Magic can also be used as-is based on the free supplement for 
Legend found on the Mongoose Publishing website here at http://www.mongoosepublishing.
com/pdf/legspiritmagic.pdf 

It is best to remember kami are powerful beings who prefer to be cajoled rather than bound and 
controlled. 

Spirit Magic in Japan is less about controlling spirits as it is about using the powers associated 
with  the  various  kami  and  elements.  A  table  of  various  kami  and  element  combinations  are 
found below and can be used by a Spirit Magician to decide the connection they have with their 
kami, the type of kami it is and the spells that kami bestows upon them. Those embarking on 
a Spirit Magic path need not concern themselves about the ways of being a Shinto priest, their 
magical  connection  with  a  kami  is  already  forged  and  their  relationship  cemented  with  that 
particular kami prior to their adventures. 

They do not need to petition the kami for anything, they just need to ensure they keep their 
kami happy by venerating the kami’s place of power, leaving offerings now and then and making 
sure nothing desecrates the location.

Ki Abilities

Ki abilities emulate and channel Legendary Abilities. When a Ki ability is successfully invoked the 
character may bring into play a Legendary Ability without having to have achieved its requisite 
requirements in terms of Characteristics, Skills or Hero Points ﬁrst. Legendary Abilities can still 
be achieved as normal when the requisites have been met and this represents the master of his 
art fully realising his Ki potential. However, before that, Legendary Abilities can be accessed in 
the following circumstances.

90
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

•	 A  character  must  seek-out  someone  who  displays  the  Ki  ability  he  wants  to  learn  and 
spend a number of days equal to the Hero Points for that Legendary Ability in dedicated 
study with the teacher. At the end of the study period he makes a Persistence test. If the 
roll is successful, he has learned to channel the Legendary Ability as a Ki ability and spends 
1 Hero Point to consolidate it. If the Persistence roll fails, he may elect to spend a similar 
period in continued study and try again. No more than two attempts to learn a Ki ability 
are permissible.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

91

•	 Learning Ki may or may not cost money; that is dependent on the teacher.
•	 Ki abilities are attached to a speciﬁc skill and may only be invoked for that skill. The 
character needs to stipulate for which skill he is developing Ki as part of his training. A list 
of Ki abilities, drawn from a variety of sources and permissible in Samurai of Legend, are 
listed in the table below, along with the skills they are related to.

•	 Multiple Ki for a single skill are permissible, as long as all the above conditions are met.

Using Ki Abilities
To use a Ki ability with a skill, the character must state that he is doing so and spend one 
Combat Action in preparation, clearing his mind and focusing on his inner Ki.

Next, the character attempts the Skill Test, for which he has learned Ki. Ki is invoked if:
•	 The Skill Test is equal to, or less than, his Persistence skill and/or
•	 The Skill Test is a critical success 

If successfully invoked, the character spends 1 Magic Point and the Ki power comes into effect 
immediately, operating as per its Legendary Ability description.

Permissible Ki Abilities
The table below lists the Ki skills permissible for Samurai of Legend characters, the skills for 
which it can be developed as Ki, all Heroic Abilities (possible Ki Abilities) are from the Legend 
Core Rulebook.

Ki Ability
Arrow Cutting
Awesome Smash
Battle Fury
Born to the Saddle
Dead Eye
Deﬁant Leap
Deﬂecting Parry
Disease Immunity
Duellist
Empathic Wound
Heroic Aura
Linguist
Loremaster
Mighty Blow
Poison Immunity
Reincarnation
Severing Slash
Sundering Strike
Tireless
Wall Leaping

92
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Skills
Close Combat style
Unarmed, bludgeon Weapon Style
Close Combat style
Ride
Ranged Weapon
Athletics
Close Combat style
Resilience
1H Combat Style
Inﬂuence
Inﬂuence
Language skills
Lore skills
Close Combat style
Resilience
Pact, Sorcery
Cutting Weapon Style
Close Combat style
Athletics
Acrobatics

New Kai/Legendary Abilities
Arrows of Heaven
Requirements: Kyujutsu or Yabusame skill at 90% or higher
Hero Points: 10

Calling upon the name of Hachiman to bless his aim, the archer can release two arrows from 
the same bow, at the same time. Both arrows must be directed at the same target and if the hit is 
successful, strike separate Hit Locations. If the attack fails, only one arrow hits and if the attack 
fumbles, neither arrow hits.
Awareness of Hachiman
Requirements: Perception skill at 90% or higher
Hero Points: 10

The character is innately aware of combat events around him. He suffers no penalties for surprise 
attacks and automatically senses the position of friends and allies, in relation to his own, during 
combat situations.

Whirling Blade of Buddha
Requirements: Naginata (Polearm) skill at 90% or higher
Hero Points: 10 (Sohei), 12 (other characters)

A sohei Ki ability (usable by any character), the warrior monk wields his naginata in a series 
of incredibly fast circles and arcs, cutting and stabbing at the same time. Using this Ki ability 
imposes a –20% penalty on anyone attempting to Evade or Parry the sohei and allows the sohei 
to make one free attack every Combat Round as a ﬁnal action.

Buddhist Magic

Heian period Buddhism is based on understanding esoteric practices; that is, it is shrouded 
in ritual and speciﬁc ritualistic practices designed to bring the practitioner closer to a state of 
enlightenment. Shingon Buddhists, in particular, study the relationship between the individual 
and the universe and have deciphered and understand the nature of magic.

All Buddhists can use Divine Magic by praying to the Buddhas. Different Buddhas offer different 
Divine spells and Buddhist priests gain and use these spells in precisely the same way as any other 
Divine magician.

There is an important difference for Buddhist priests when it comes to casting Divine magic: the 
Lore (Theology - either Shingon or Tendai, as appropriate) test result must be equal to or lower 
than, the priest’s current Purity. If it is higher than the Purity value, then the spell fails, even if 
the Lore (Theology) test is otherwise successful.

Available Divine Spells
Not all the Divine spells listed in the Legend Core Rulebook are compatible with Buddhism – 
principally those that cause direct harm to a living creature. Those that can be used and the 
Buddhas offering them, are listed in the Buddhist Divine Spell table below. 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

93

Sohei and Divine Magic
Sohei  characters  also  have  access  to  Divine  Magic  in  the  same  way  as  Buddhist  priests.  As  a 
martial profession that follows the tenets of Buddhism, rather than being ordained into a holy 
contract, they are also able to use certain spells denied to priests. These are noted in the Buddhist 
Divine Spell table below.

Buddhist Divine Spells
Divine Spell
Absorption
Berserk (Sohei only)
Breathe Water
Consecrate
Dismiss Magic
Exorcism
Extension
Fear (Sohei only)
Heal Body
Heal Wound
Illusion (Motion)
Illusion (Odour)
Illusion (Sight)
Illusion (Sound)
Illusion (Substance)
Illusion (Taste)
Mindlink
Reﬂection
Shield
Soul Sight
Spirit Block
Divine Spell
Sureshot (Sohei Only)
True (Weapon) (Sohei Only)

Buddhas Offering
Amida, Enma O, Inari, Myo-O, 
Hachiman, Myo-O, San Senjin
Amida, Go-Chi
Amida, Go-Chi, Jizo
Amida, Go-Chi, Inari
Jizo
Enma O, Myo-O, 
Hachiman, Myo- O, San Senjin, Shi Daitenno
Amida, Go-Chi, Jizo
Amida, Go-Chi, Jizo
Go-Chi, Inari, San Senjin (Marishiten)
Go-Chi, San Senjin (Marishiten)
Go-Chi, Inari, San Senjin (Marishiten)
Go-Chi, San Senjin (Marishiten)
Go-Chi, San Senjin (Marishiten)
Go-Chi, San Senjin (Marishiten)
Amida, Go-Chi, Inari, Myo- O
Amida, Go-Chi, Shi Daitenno
Hachiman, San Senjin
Amida, Jizo
Amida, Go-Chi, Jizo
Buddhas Offering
Hachiman, Myo- O, San Senjin, Shi Daitenno
Hachiman, Myo- O, San Senjin, Shi Daitenno

New Buddhist 
Divine Spells
Blessing of Nio
Duration 15, Magnitude 1, Trigger
Buddhas: Enma-o, Hachiman, San-Senjin

This spell enchants a guardian statue to a Buddhist temple, enabling it to animate and attack 
anyone who approaches the temple meaning it or its inhabitants, harm. Once cast the spell lies 
dormant until an intruder or enemy attempts to cross the temple boundary. At the end of the spell’s 

94
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

duration the nio return to their inanimate state. The spell must be recast to rest the enchantment. 
Nio are tireless combatants, suffering no fatigue but are, due to their stone-state, slow. As these are 
animated statues they feel no pain and suffer no debilitating effects from major wounds, although 
a nio losing a leg will automatically topple over but can continue ﬁghting from a prone position 
with appropriate modiﬁers. Animated nio have the following characteristics:

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
4D6+12
3D6+9
4D6+12
1D6+3
3D6
2D6
2D6

Average
26
18
26
6
11
7
7

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-9
10-12
13-15
16-18
19-20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
8/9
8/9
8/10
8/11
8/8
8/8
8/9

Armour: Tough Hide, no Skill Penalty

Traits: Formidable Natural Weapons, Night 
Sight

Skills:  Perception 35%, Resilience 50%, 
Stealth 20%, Survival 35%

Range 
- 
 

Size 
M 
 

Reach 
L 
 

Damage 
1D10+1 
1D10+2 (2h)

 
 

AP/HP
5/11

Combat Actions 2
Damage Modiﬁer 
+1D12 
Magic Points 11

Movement 4m
Strike Rank +6

Weapons
Type  
 
Stone Tachi 
 
 

Combat Styles
Stone Tachi 40%

Blessing of the Myo-O
Duration 15, Magnitude 1, Trigger
Buddhas: Myo-O

Similar in nature to Blessing of Nio, this spell enchants a Myo-O guardian statue within the 
precincts of a temple. Once cast the spell lies dormant until an intruder or enemy attempts to 
bypass a Myo-O from direction it guards. The spell must be cast separately on each Myo-O 
statue if all four directions and the centre are to be protected. When activated the Myo-O statue 
launches a psychic attack against the intruder. The intruder must match his Persistence against 
the Myo-O’s Persistence of 90% in an Opposed test. If the test is lost, the intruder is forced to his 
knees and must pray to the Buddhas for forgiveness and enlightenment, remaining helpless for 
15 minutes. Once the effect has completed the statue becomes inert and must be re-enchanted.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Interpret Mandala
Concentration, Magnitude 1, Touch
Buddhas: Amida, Go-Chi, Inari

The priest creates a mandala upon either paper or wood and contemplates its inner meaning 
whilst  calling  upon  the  Buddhas  for  temporary  enlightenment.  If  successful,  any  problem, 
conundrum  or  mystery  that  has  been  troubling  the  priest  becomes  immediately  clear  as  the 
priest sees through the illusion of earthly distraction.

Prayer of Nirvana
Duration 1 Hour, Magnitude 1, Area

When cast an area in radius equal to the priest’s POW in metres becomes open to the light of 
Nirvana – a spot of holy paradise for as long as the priest maintains concentration. No earthly 
element, natural disaster or physical attack can harm all those within the spell’s area of effect and 
all effects of Fatigue are immediately alleviated. Anyone who has sustained a wound regains 1D3 
Hit Points to each injured Hit Location.

Prayer of Peace
Duration 15, Magnitude 1, Progressive, Ranged, Resist (Persistence)
Buddhas: Amida, Bosatsu, Go-Chi, Shi Daitenno

The target of the spell immediately loses any will or compulsion to ﬁght and instead assumes 
the lotus position and contemplates the folly of senseless violence for the duration of the spell.

Prayer of Wisdom
Duration 15, Magnitude 1, Touch, Resist (Persistence)
Buddhas: Amida, Go-Chi

The  target  of  the  spell  receives  temporary  enlightenment,  seeing  before  him  the  inﬁnite 
wisdom of the Buddhas and being able to communicate it with eloquence and conviction. His 
Inﬂuence and Oratory skills are doubled and he automatically gains Lore (Buddhist Theology) 
at POW+INT for the spell’s duration.

Shinto Magic

Magic occupies a curious place in the Shinto religion. All Shinto priests consider the knowing 
of magic to be polluting but also recognise, without any difﬁculty, the ability of the kami to 
work magic and miracles. Shinto priests believe that magic originates from the divine realms 
of Heaven and is channelled through kami for the good of the world. It is not for humans to 
know or use it directly but to petition the kami to work magic on their behalf. Thus, Shinto 
priests do not seek to learn spells or magical effects but they do ask the kami to work magic for 
them or through them, when the need is great.

Kami and Powers

Kami fall into two categories, major and minor. Major kami represent the deities and demigods 
of the religion – the Heavenly deities and the kami of the major natural and spiritual features 

96
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

revered throughout Japan, such as Mount Fujiyama. Minor kami are the kami of the elements 
and the ancestral kami, revered by communities and households.

Kami  are  spirits  and  as  such,  largely  conform  to  the  rules  for  spirits.  However,  kami  are  not 
wandering spirit entities; they are irrevocably tied to their place of veneration or enshrinement and 
this has an effect on the inﬂuence they bring to bear. Strictly speaking a kami can only inﬂuence 
the area it is responsible for and in the case of minor kami this can be as little as a particular patch 
of ground. For major kami the sphere of inﬂuence is far more wide ranging. The kami of Mount 
Fujiyama, for example, inﬂuence everything upon the mountain – ground, trees, streams, rivers, 
stone, snow and wildlife. Major kami frequently have minor kami existing within their territory 
and where this overlap exists, the major kami will, for the most part, leave the minor kami to its 
own devices and will not intervene in its actions. However if something threatens the entire area 
inﬂuenced by the major kami, then it will act in the best interests of all within its sphere of power.

Kami do not possess corporeal creatures and neither can they be compelled to do so. Possession is 
simply not part of a kami’s nature and whilst it might work magic through another person, this 
does not count as possession.

Minor Kami

Minor kami know a number of Spirit Magic spells equal to their INT/3, rounded up, to a total 
Magnitude of POW/3, rounded up. Spells are always appropriate to their nature and/or sphere of 
inﬂuence, as noted in the Spirit Magic table below. The kami’s ability to cast a spell is its POW x5.

Kami of Place and Elements
These are the kami most likely to be encountered in a rural shrine. They are the embodiments 
of a place and element or a particular item such as a particularly old and ﬁne cherry blossom 
tree. They are able to manifest a representation of themselves, typically in a human form but 
more  often  than  not  communicate  through  subtle  signs  and  manipulations  of  the  physical 
environment around them. These kami can work magic, either directly or through Shinto priests 
but must be successfully petitioned ﬁrst.

Elemental kami represent the ﬁve elements: Air, Earth, Fire, Water and Wood. They are present 
anywhere that these elements are found in purity and abundance. Their magic is restricted largely 
to their element but not exclusively so. Elemental kami tend to represent the characteristics of 
their element; thus, kami of the air or talkative but ﬂighty, kami of the earth are serious and stoic, 
kami of ﬁre can be aggressive and hot-headed (literally), kami of water tend to be reﬂective and 
evasive and kami of wood all-wise and knowledgeable.

Kami of Place and Elements Characteristics

INT
POW
CHA
Spirit Magic Available: Dependent on place or element. Spirit Magic POWx3

Average
11
16
11

Dice
3D6
3D6+6
3D6

Skills: Inﬂuence INTx3, Lore (Local Area) INT x3 OR Lore (Element) INT x3, Lore (Ways of 
the Kami) INT x3, Persistence POW x3, Resilience 10+INT+POW, any two Lore skills relevant 
to the kami’s location.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

97

Ancestral Kami
These are the kami of beloved ancestors, revered at household and community shrines. They 
watch over a family, a house or a whole community but are otherwise a largely symbolic presence.

The  characteristics  of  Ancestral  kami  are  based  on  the  INT,  POW  and  CHA  values  for  the 
original ancestor. Ancestral kami can work magic but only ever do so directly – never through a 
priest. Furthermore, they usually only employ magic when the family, household or community 
is under threat and as with other kami, only when successfully petitioned.

Ancestral Kami Characteristics
Dice
3D6
3D6
3D6

INT
POW
CHA

Average
11
11
11

Spirit Magic Available: Dependent on place. Spirit Magic POWx3

Skills: Inﬂuence INTx3, Lore (Family) INT x3 OR Lore (Community) INT x3, Lore (Ways of 
the Kami) INT x3, Persistence POW x3, Resilience 10+INT+POW, any two Lore skills relevant 
to the kami’s family or location.

Major Kami

Controlling much greater areas than minor kami, major kami are akin to primal forces of nature 
but with the ability to express themselves clearly to those venerating them. Whilst a manifestation 
is a rare occurrence, it does happen from time to time, if the kami feels it appropriate. Otherwise, 
interaction is at a spiritual level or via subtle signals and abstractions.

Major kami know both Spirit and Divine Magic. A kami has a number of Spirit Magic spells 
equal to its POW/2, rounded up and Divine Spells equal to its POW/3, rounded up.

Major Kami Characteristics

INT
POW
CHA

Dice
6D6
6D6+6
6D6

Average
21
24
21

Spirit and Divine Magic Available: Dependent on place. Spirit Magic POWx5, Divine Magic 
POW x3

Skills: Inﬂuence INTx3, Lore (Regional) INT x3 OR Lore (Speciﬁc Natural Feature) INT x3, 
Lore (Ways of the Kami) INT x3, Persistence POW x3, Resilience 10+INT+POW, any two Lore 
skills relevant to the kami’s location or function.

98
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Kami and Magic
To call upon the magic of the kami, the Shinto priest has two options; petition the kami to work 
magic directly or to work magic through the priest. The former method is best employed when 
the kami is present in the area where the magic needs to be worked and is more potent as a result. 
The second method, where the priest seeks to channel a kami’s magic, allows magic to be worked 
further aﬁeld but is weaker. In both cases, the priest needs to petition the kami to secure its help. 
This  is  done  through  an  Opposed  test  matching  the  priest’s  current  Purity  against  the  kami’s 
Persistence. A success means the kami acquiesces to the request and either works magic directly or 
establishes a spiritual link with the priest.

The chance of the magic working requires a test against the kami’s requisite skill in the spell, as per 
any normal working of magic. If the magic is being worked through the priest, then the priest’s 
Purity is used as the Skill Test value. Thus, a kami with Bless Crops 65% would roll directly against 
its Bless Crops percentage. However, if a priest with a Purity of 55% is channelling the spell from 
the kami (to bless a rice crop in a distant locale, say) then the test would be made against the Purity 
percentage instead. Where magic is being channelled the Purity value cannot exceed the kami’s 
score in the magic skill. So, if the priest in the above example had a Purity of 80%, the chance for 
the spell to work would be 65%, not 80%.

Minor kami can affect 1 jo (3 metres) in radius for each point of POW, with its shrine as the 
centre point. Thus a kami with a POW of 12 could affect an area of 12 jo (36 metres) from 
its shrine. Major kami can affect a similar area but measured in ken (109 metres). Where a 
priest is channelling a kami’s magic, the distance is immaterial but the spell’s magnitude cannot 
exceed the critical value of the priest’s Purity score. Thus, a priest with Purity of 60% could not 
channel magic with a Magnitude of more than 6.

Spirit Magic Spells Available to Kami
The Spirit Magic a kami knows depends on its type and its rank. Major kami have access to a 
much wider range of Spirit spells than minor kami. The spells available (taken from the Magic 
chapter of the Legend core rules) are summarised below. An X indicates that the spell is available 
to a kami, if it is appropriate to its location and inﬂuence:

Kami Spirit Magic

Ancestral Kami Major Kami
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X

Kami of Place Kami of Elements
X
Babel
X
Befuddle
Clear Path
X
Co-Ordination X
X
Darkwall
X
Demoralise
X
Detect X
Dullblade
X
X
Endurance
X
Extinguish
X
Fate
Glamour
X
Golden Tongue X

X
X

X
X

X

X

X

X
X
X

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

99

Kami of Place Kami of Elements
X

Heal
Ignite
Light
Lucky
Mindspeech
Neutralise 
Magic
Mobility
Protection
Repair

Second Sight
Slow
Strength
Thunder’s 
Voice
Vigour
Warmth
Water breath

X
X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X (Fire Only)
X

X
X

X
X
X (Only affects 
element of the 
kami)
X

X

X
X
X (Water only)

Ancestral Kami Major Kami
X

X

X
X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X

New Shinto Divine Spells
Bless (X)
Duration Instant, Magnitude 1, Area

This is both a Divine Magic spell and a Spirit Magic spell. It allows the kami to place a protective 
blessing on a particular element or item appropriate to its type. The area of effect is as per the 
kami’s affect radius as described earlier. Once cast, the Blessing lasts for a number of days equal 
to the Magnitude of the spell and provides the protected area with a Resilience score equal to the 
kami’s POW x5%, which is used to resist both physical and supernatural attacks upon it. If the 
blessed area succeeds in a Resilience test, the attack fails immediately. If the Resilience test fails, 
then the area suffers half the appropriate attack damage or effects. If the result is a fumble, then 
the full attack effect is suffered.
Prayer of Heaven
Duration 1 Hour, Magnitude 1, Area
Kami: Amaterasu, Major Kami

Similar to the Buddhist spell, Prayer of Nirvana and with similar effects. When cast an area in 
radius equal to the priest’s POW in metres becomes open to the light of 

Heaven, illuminated by Amaterasu herself. 
Prayer of Peace
Duration 15, Magnitude 1, Progressive, Ranged, Resist (Persistence)
Kami: Major Kami

100
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Similar to the Buddhist spell. The target of the spell immediately loses any will or compulsion 
to ﬁght and instead assumes the lotus position and contemplates the folly of senseless violence 
for the duration of the spell.

Prayer of Wisdom
Duration 15, Magnitude 1, Touch, Resist (Persistence)
Kami: Amaterasu, Major Kami

The target of the spell receives temporary enlightenment, seeing before him the inﬁnite wisdom 
of the kami and being able to communicate it with eloquence and conviction. His Inﬂuence and 
Oratory skills are doubled and he automatically gains Lore (Shinto Theology) at POW+INT for 
the spell’s duration.

Sorcery

The Japanese are deeply resentful of sorcery, which is seen as perverting nature and going against 
the teachings of both Shinto and the Buddhas. Its practice, during the Heian period, is strictly 
outlawed but that has not prevented some from dabbling in the sorcerous arts.

Sorcerers are called youjutsusha and unless they wish to be caught and executed, work in exile and 
effectively become casteless and classless, irrespective of their social standing. The practice of sorcery 
is thus a lonely and dangerous occupation. The noble clans are always on the look-out for suspected 
sorcerers, usually to capture them and thus be highly praised by the Imperial Court and advance their 
status but just occasionally, because a sorcerer might prove useful. Where clans make use of sorcerers 
for their own ends, they take great care to cover their tracks, usually working through intermediaries to 
prevent a trail leading back to threaten the clan’s honour. Sorcerers know their value in this regard and 
whilst many hate what the clans represent, they are prepared to do business albeit with a hidden agenda.

Sorcerers blame all the major institutions of state for their lack of status. The Imperial Court, 
they believe, is controlled by the Buddhist temples and has become blinkered and corrupt as a 
result. The Buddhists are simply jealous of any that threaten their station and the wars between 
the Mount Hiei and Nara temples reinforce this point of view. The clans, interested in power, 
are simply not to be trusted. Some sorcerers who claim to be able to see the future predict that 
the clans, if left unchecked, will eventually institute a reign of martial rule that will endanger 
Japan’s progress as a civilised nation. There may be some truth in this. The daimyo and samurai 
grow more powerful each year and the Imperial Court is little more than a puppet for Fujiwara 
politicking.

So it is that some, if not most, sorcerers, seek to subvert the existing order. Some are more 
surreptitious and benign in their approach but others, such as the feared Tanagaro, are more 
forthright, using their knowledge and powers to form alliances with all manner of malevolence, 
especially the demonic oni and the malicious, envious, bakemono.

Available Sorcery
All the sorcery spells described in the Legend Core Rulebook are available to sorcerers.

Playing a Sorcerer
Youjutsusha characters are exiles and forced to live on the very fringes of society, well below their 
station in life. It is likely that they are in communication with others of their kind and may very 
well be protected by a ninja clan (see The Way of the Warriors chapter) if they have a permanent, 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

101

well-hidden  base.  It  is  perfectly  possible  for  a  sorcerer  to  be  faithful  to  Buddhism,  although 
excommunicated  ofﬁcially  from  the  faith,  for  there  is  a  certain  enlightenment  to  be  realised 
through experimenting with the illusion of reality.

Nor does the youjutsusha character need to be bitter and resentful; not all sorcerers are. He may 
simply  conform  to  the  traditional  Chinese  notion  of  the  hermetic  wizard,  intent  on  study  and 
learning, rather than exercising magical power for personal gain. Whatever the sorcerer’s outlook 
on  life,  Japanese  society  rarely  looks  favourably  on  them  and  so  their  activities  will  need  to  be 
carefully  concealed  and  their  magic,  when  visibly  used,  explained  in  terms  that  will  not  attract 
undue  suspicion. This  may  prove  much  harder  than  it  sounds;  Buddhist  priests  will  be  on  the 
watch for the signs of sorcery and will not hesitate to mobilise sohei to apprehend any youjutsusha 
in their midst.

More  difﬁculties  emerge  in  trying  to  advance  sorcerous  expertise. There  are  very  few  scrolls 
and books of sorcerous lore in Japan. What few exist are guarded either by the Imperial Court, 
certain Buddhist temples (mostly of the Shingon sect) or the more powerful sorcerers. Sorcery is 
practiced in mainland China and occasionally a sorcerer is able to come by a Chinese tome either 
be travelling to China or through clandestine means across the Inland Sea. This restriction on 
knowledge may prove troublesome for youjutsusha characters, although by no means a complete 
hindrance.

102
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

ways of the warriors

This chapter concerns itself with the warrior classes of Samurai of Legend; the samurai themselves, 
the sohei and the ninja.

As mentioned earlier, ninja are an anachronism. They emerged as a recognised group sometime 
in the early 14th Century and almost certainly did not exist before then. However, as they form 
such an iconic part of Japanese warrior myth and because there are no doubt Games Masters and 
players who wish to include ninja in any samurai game, this chapter discusses them and offers an 
alternative, mythic rationale for their appearance during the Heian period.

Lineage and Challenges
All  samurai  are  proud  of  their  achievements  and  those  of  their  forebears.  Before  almost  any 
combat – pitched battle or single duel – it is common for a samurai to list his lineage, stress the 
great deeds of his forebears and highlight the great deeds of himself. Most battles between samurai 
began in this fashion, with prolonged exchanges establishing the worth and notoriety of each 
opponent. For samurai characters it is recommended that a role call of such deeds (with deeds 
accomplished during play being added frequently) be developed. Before a combat, succeeding in 
an Inﬂuence test after reciting the character’s lineage and achievements, especially if done in an 
arrogant and rousing fashion, should earn the character a few points of On.

The Samurai

The word samurai is derived from the verb saburu, meaning ‘to serve’ and it came into use at 
some time during the 8th Century but not in a martial context, referring instead to domestic 
servants caring for the elderly and inﬁrmed. Its current meaning developed during the 9th and 
10th Centuries when bushi went to the capital to serve guard duty for the Fujiwara regency, a 
function that then developed into the samurai serving the Imperial Court as its ad-hoc army, 
disbanding after a particular campaign was ﬁnished.

However, as the clans and families of the Heian period grew in power, so did their need for their 
own coteries of loyal warriors who would defend property, lives and reputations and put-down 
bandits and rebels. With increasing wealth the noble families were able to guarantee regular pay 
and parcels of land that outstripped the capabilities of the Imperial Exchequer and so bushi, 
especially the samurai, were attracted to a change of employment. However the clans did not 
just  want  mercenaries  and  sell-swords. They  wanted  loyalty  and  armies  that  could  be  raised 
quickly and so chose carefully only those who displayed loyalty to a master and who deserved 
the title of samurai. In this way the samurai were no longer the exclusive preserve of the Imperial 
Court, although throughout the Heian period the samurai of the various clans were loaned into 
service on behalf of the Emperor. The clans could therefore build their own armed strength, the 
government beneﬁted from troops when needed and the samurai gained prestige through the 
service of both their Lord and the Emperor.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

103

The title of samurai denotes the elite ﬁghting man, distinguishing him from the common foot 
soldier, the ashigaru. Claims to noble lineage play some role in acquiring the title but equally 
important is glory in combat. The more impressive the bushi’s skill with weapons, especially the 
bow and the horse and the more kills taken, the stronger the claim to the samurai title. Along 
with the prestige of battle, glory and expertise came a certain wealth and so came respect. The 
samurai were treated as more than simple retainers by the daimyo and clan heads and more as 
valued warriors symbolising the clan or family’s own status and strength.

Arrow Duels
To prove combat superiority and conﬁrm bravery and honour, samurai are known to ﬁght ya-
awase or arrow duels. Ya-awase are a common feature of pitched battles, both to provide samurai 
with a means of proving themselves in the face of their enemies but also to provide a diversion 
for other tactical deployments, a ploy used by Minamoto Yoshinaka against a Taira opponent 
at the Battle of Kurkara during the Gempei Wars, when he fought a prolonged ya-awase to buy 
time for his samurai to cover both sides of the Taira forces. 

The process is simple and not unlike jousting. The two opponents agree terms (place, date, time) 
and arrive with their mount, bow and arrows. Spectators who can recount the duel are almost 
obligatory and are usually other samurai. The duellists separate themselves by about 100 metres, 
ready their bows and spur forth, riding towards each other at full gallop. Arrows are discharged 
by the duellists as they pass each other. The duellists then slow down, turn at the agreed distance 
and repeat the process until three arrows have been ﬁred. After three arrows have been shot, the 
duel is considered at an end, irrespective of death and honour satisﬁed. The winner of the duel is 
the one who has killed, wounded or landed more arrows on his adversary but if both survive the 
duel, there is no shame or loss of face incurred.

Characters who decide to engage in ya-awase must make an opposed test of their Persistence 
against their opponent’s Persistence as the two duellists spend a little time in a psychological 
exchange before the charge begins. The loser of the test suffers a penalty of –20% to his Yabusame 
skill for the duration of the contest. If the winner of the test is a critical success, the winner gains 
a bonus of +20%. If the loser fumbles the test, he must make a straight forward test against his 
On score to avoid declining the duel. Further modiﬁers to the Yabusame as below:

Any samurai taking part in a ya-awase gains On according to the following scale:

Taking part in the duel 
Killing the opponent 
Wounding the Opponent 
Hitting with three arrows 
Hitting with two arrows 
Hitting with one arrow 
Declining the duel 

 

+5
+12
+9
+7
+5
+3
–20%

104
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Japanese  warriors  have  always  been  concerned  with  personal  honour  and  glory  and  as  the 
samurai became a part of the clan structure, so too did notions of personal honour and loyalty. 
It became honourable for a samurai to be in active service and dishonourable to be outside 
it. It became honourable to wear the mon of a successful family or better still, a clan and be 
noted for the association. The samurai who distinguished himself on the battleﬁeld could look 
forward to ﬁnancial rewards and other honours, whilst the ashigaru remained the unknown 
and often un-thanked, infantry who frequently turned battles in favour of the head-strong, 
glory-hungry samurai.

Every samurai seeks glory and prestige. As a social class, excellence in the martial skills is drummed 
into every youth as he practices with bow and sword, the heroes of the clan being held-up as 
examples of what a samurai can achieve. Yet with that glory comes continued service, for without 
service the opportunities for glory are very much reduced. So it is that the samurai emerged as, 
not simply a force of relatively wealthy soldiers with vague claims on nobility but a social class 
in their own right. Great pride is taken in personal loyalty, for it reinforces the position of the 
samurai social class and commands respect from every stage of the caste hierarchies. Unswerving 
dedication to a Lord and cause accords honour not just to the individual samurai but also to 
the samurai’s family. Thus, the title of samurai extends beyond the individual and envelopes the 
family. For a son to carry the title samurai reﬂects well on his father and mother and goes some 
way towards repaying the debt all Japanese children owe to their parents.

However,  the  samurai  are  not  always  noble  and  honourable  warriors  in  the  tradition  of  the 
chivalric knights of the west. Samurai ﬁrst and foremost, serve a Lord and Lords have needs and 
agendas that might require low cunning and a ruthless application of force to achieve a successful 
end.  Samurai  are  therefore  not  supposed  to  question  their  Lord’s  motives  and  to  do  so  is 
dishonourable. It should not matter that the daimyo’s needs themselves might be dishonourable; 
loyalty comes before the detail of the deeds to be done. During the Heian period and especially 
in the Gempei Wars, the samurai readily stooped to trickery and sometimes, cruel means to 
secure victory. Whilst personal honour is of the utmost importance to the samurai, it should 
not be confused with nobility. The best remembered samurai heroes display nobility but usually 
in the context of service to their daimyo or immediate colleagues. In the face of their enemies, 
displays of nobility can be costly to life and limb. Displays of honour and ruthless capability 
prove to be far more efﬁcient for cementing personal reputation and achieving military goals.

Certainly, the arrogance of the samurai could make them exceedingly hard to command. The idea 
of ranks of well-ordered samurai, moving and ﬁghting in tightly formed and well co-ordinated units 
is something that did not truly come to pass until the feudal age. During the Heian period samurai, 
obsessed  with  achieving  personal  glory,  could  be  difﬁcult  for  a  commander  to  control,  surging 
forwards on the battleﬁeld in search of a worthy opponent, rather than waiting for a direct order to 
attack a speciﬁc target. Personal honour frequently clouds the mind of the young and eager samurai, 
making them tempestuous, if brave, warriors, willing to cut a single-handed arrow-swathe through 
the opposition instead of working within a group to achieve victory with less risk.

The Way of the Horse and the Bow
In combat, the samurai of the Heian period are masters of the horse and bow, rather than being, 
explicit masters of the blade. A mounted samurai archer is a formidable opponent; trained to ride 
at speed and shoot with unerring accuracy and this ability – the Way of the Horse and Bow – is 
what helped compensate for the samurais’ head-strong and reckless pursuit of personal glory. 
Unswerving loyalty, something to prove to oneself and one’s Lord and brilliance with the dai kyu, 
is what cemented the samurais’ formidable reputation as warriors par excellence.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

105

In Samurai of Legend, the Way of the Horse and the Bow is embodied in the Yabusame skill, 
which combines the talents of bowmanship and horsemanship into a single skill. Whilst it is not 
compulsory for any samurai character to be skilled in Yabusame, any samurai seeking personal 
glory and an enhanced reputation will consider it a key skill for his profession. There are many 
tales of the Heian period that venerate the samurai skill with the bow and in account, a samurai 
being beset by enemies notes with some relief that his opponents are armed with swords rather 
than bows.

The Sword of the Samurai
Whilst for many, if not most samurai, the weapon of true excellence is the bow, the mystique 
of the sword is not entirely absent from the Heian period, although many of the traditions and 
myths attached to the ‘soul of the samurai’ are in their infancy.

The preferred sword was not the familiar katana – although the katana is certainly available – it 
is the tachi. Slightly longer than the katana and worn scabbarded at the side, slung from a belt 
or on the saddle, the tachi is every bit as fearsome a weapon and built with the same care and 
craftsmanship as its more famous cousin. The tachi is, however, worn with the blade edge facing 
towards the ground, meaning it requires two hands to draw and is harder to be drawn iajutsu-
fashion.

It is impossible to say at exactly what point the bow was supplanted by the sword as the noted 
samurai weapon but there is no reason why certain samurai would prefer a blade to a quiver and 
drawstring. In close combat situations on foot a dai kyu is certainly unwieldy and the sword the 
natural weapon of choice and given the samurai’s dedication to excellence in ﬁghting, skill with 
the sword would not be ignored. So, whilst it will take a further 200 years or so for the sword 
to achieve its mythical status as the samurai weapon, there is no question that it is an important 
weapon in the arsenal of the bushi.

The Sohei

The peaceful nature of Buddhism is somewhat compromised by the warrior-monks of the Nara 
and Hiei temples. The placid nature of the shaven-headed priest is replaced by the ﬁerce scowl, 
bristled headed, robe and cowl, of the sohei. Protecting and enforcing the political and ﬁnancial 
interests of the great temples, as well their spiritual ones, the sohei are the earthly representation 
of the fearsome, vengeful Buddhas of Buddhist lore. The sohei might cleave to Buddhist ideals 
and worship alongside the normal monks but in terms of sheer conviction, the warrior-monks 
rival the samurai in terms of martial skill and determination to serve.

The sohei have two exceedingly efﬁcient weapons: their faith and their blades. All sohei carry 
with them a rosary, with which they readily curse, in the name of the Buddhas, anyone daring 
to stand in their way or disobey them. Such curses are especially effective against those high-
ranking Ryomin who cleave deeply to Buddhist philosophies but also affect the superstitious 
peasants just as easily. Samurai, used to oaths, threats and proclamations of power are less easily 
shaken by sohei curses but are still wary of the warrior-monks’ skill with weapons. If some kind 
of spiritual reinforcement is necessary for the sohei, they turn not towards magic but towards the 
production of the omikoshi, the portable Shinto shrine that represents the spiritual power and 
purity maintained by all temples and monasteries (and the enshrinement of the kami Sanno). 
The omikoshi is a sacred symbol and carrying it forth from the temple actively dares those who 
would oppose the will of the temple (or sohei) to make good their protests and this insult to 
the sanctity embodied by the shrine. Few would ever dare risk such a challenge, especially when 
the 12 sohei needed to carry the omikoshi chanted, in unison, all 600 of the Dai Hannya sutra 

106
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

as a curse. For good measure, the omikoshi might be left in a prominent spot as a continuing 
challenge and symbol of the temple’s power, until the monks have got their own way.

The second weapon is the arsenal of the sohei. Like the samurai the sohei wear armour beneath 
their hooded robes of black, grey or saffron and carry katana or tachi, tanto, bows and their 
feared weapon of choice, the naginata. Wielded with two hands it makes a superb slicing and 
stabbing weapon and an adept sohei can whirl the naginata in a series of eye-defying arcs, cutting 
and parrying whilst he does so.

Like the samurai, sohei wear armour of a very similar design. The armour is usually then topped 
by the sohei’s loose robes which are typically white, black, dark grey or saffron in colour and 
accompanied by a deep cowl covering the head. If the robes are not worn, a headband is worn 
around the shaven head to denote the warrior’s status as sohei.

Sohei also use shields on the battleﬁeld. Whilst these were falling out of favour during the Heian 
period  (samurai  ﬁghting  mounted  for  the  most  part  and  unable  to  use  a  shield  effectively), 
sohei used shields when ﬁghting with swords or short spears, forming a shield wall against their 
opponents.

The sohei therefore present a formidable class of bushi. Religiously devote, unafraid to cause 
trouble in the name of their temple, dressed to intimidate and with a readiness to call upon holy 
curses to terrify their enemies, they present an interesting contrast to the samurai and a very 
different view of the Buddhist way.

The Ninja

When the sorcerers of Japan were outlawed by Imperial Decree in 807, they quickly realised 
that they needed to do two things if they were to continue their practices, for good or ill, with 
as little molestation as possible: to go into hiding and then to protect themselves. Whilst the 
sorcerers had magical means of escaping detection and maintaining protection, these could not 
be entirely relied upon. To this end, various sorcerers actively began to recruit warriors who, for 
one reason or another, felt disenfranchised themselves. They recruited carefully, choosing those 
who held a clear grudge against the Emperor and the emerging clans such as the Fujiwara and 
Minamoto. Promising to teach these warriors, bandits and renegades new techniques of warfare, 
some of them blending sorcerous elements and mundane techniques that would pass as magical 
in nature, the ﬁrst ninja clans were created in the wilds of Japan. Over the course of a century 
or more these disparate warrior groups formed communities and developed a loyalty to their 
sorcerous masters, creating an effective counter-culture to the emerging samurai class. By 1001 
the ninja, as recognisable entities, are fully functional, serving both the sorcerers and developing 
agendas  of  their  own.  Long  years  of  indoctrination  against  the  ruling  classes  has  created  an 
underclass that is actively opposed to the Heian power structures and one that is truly formidable 
in the arts of espionage, stealth and covert combat. The ninja serve practitioners of magic but 
have reached a level of conﬁdence and expertise that they do not need to rely upon them to be 
effective. Whilst the Imperial Court denies their existence, the ninja are very much in evidence, 
working against the Imperial Court, the clans and the Buddhist temples whom, the sorcerers 
claim, were the motivators behind the 807 Imperial Decree.

Mirroring the great noble houses, the ninja have organised themselves into clans and have developed 
their own, internal codes of honour, debt and obligation centred on the sorcerer or sorcerers they 
protect (and whom are venerated like kami). Their outlook, however, is fundamentally different 
to the Ryomin clans. Ninja do not seek to expand their territories or consolidate their power in 
geographical or political terms. Instead they seek to advance through the collection of information, 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

107

which can then be used against all the existing power structures. They do not seek to destroy the 
Imperial Court but they do seek ways to have an Emperor enthroned that will repeal the edicts 
outlawing sorcery and who will be prepared to challenge the might of the Fujiwara, Minamoto and 
Taira clans and be prepared to stand-up to the Buddhist temples. To achieve this aim they therefore 
act as spies, insurgents and occasionally, assassins working subtly towards shifting the balance of 
power and creating a more (as they see it) harmonious society. They also maintain their protective 
role for the sorcerers, aiming to advance whatever schemes the sorcerers assemble and take revenge 
for the massive dishonour the sorcerers have had to endure for almost 200 years.

The ninja clans are organised into communities that are, to outsiders, typical heimin settlements 
located in out of the way regions. A casual visitor cannot distinguish between a ninja community 
and a legitimate heimin village and it is common for the ninja to pledge allegiance to one or 
another of the major clans to maintain their subterfuge. However ninja clans have no daimyo 
or  samurai  in  their  midst.  Somewhere  –  perhaps  living  amongst  them  or  hidden  in  a  secret 
hermitage or cavern complex – there will be the sorcerer or sorcerers that the ninja are sworn 
to protect. Ninja are not bandits or indiscriminate killers any longer; most non-ninja passing 
through their settlements are perfectly safe, although they will be watched extremely carefully at 
every opportunity. The last thing the ninja want is a sudden disappearance to provoke samurai 
investigations but they will defend their communities and can, if they so wish, make those with 
far too curious a nature vanish into thin air. If samurai or sohei do come looking for sorcerers 
to oust, as they do from time to time, then the ninja use their considerable skills of stealth and 
ambush  to  counter  the  intrusion  before  it  can  become  an  all-out  attack,  dressing  in  the  all-
black or all-green garb that hides their identities and allows them almost perfect camouﬂage in 
the undergrowth surrounding their communities. Samurai deaths are then made to look like 
accidents or the attacks of wild animals or malicious bakemono in order to divert suspicion away 
from their villages.

Each ninja clan is organised into a general hierarchy as follows. At the head is the sorcerer or 
sennin. The sennin is a ﬁgurehead who has little to do with the clan’s day to day business but 
maintains  control  over  particular  missions  and  largely  works  to  his  own  agenda. The  clan  is 
directly  controlled  by  a  jonin,  who  acts  as  the  clan  chief,  makes  policy  and  decides  strategy, 
usually in consultation with advisers. The jonin is usually the only member of the clan to have 
any direct contact with the sennin but this varies from clan to clan.

108
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

One thing that might identify a ninja settlement, to those who are on the look-out for such 
things,  is  an  absence  of  Buddhist  regalia  and  trappings.  It  is  common  for  heimin  to  cleave 
directly to Shinto but even the most humble heimin community retains some respect for the 
Buddhas. Not so the ninja; Buddhism is not embraced, although Shinto is and the eagle-eyed 
might notice such an anomaly when passing through a seemingly innocuous peasant village.

Below the jonin are the chunin, the clan elders and advisers. Chunin are retired ninja operatives 
and are in charge of training and logistics. They plan the speciﬁc missions and activities of the 
clan to achieve the jonin’s strategy and the sennin’s over-arching objectives.

Finally there are the genin, the ninja foot soldiers and the bulk of the clan.

To all intents and purposes, the community looks and acts like any normal heimin village. 
Crops are tended, paddy ﬁelds worked and lumber cut. Clan members have wives and families 
but  all  are  part  of  the  great  secret  work  of  the  ninja  clan  and  women  can  be  expected  to 
undertake ninja tasks just as much as the men. Indeed, female genin are extremely useful in 
many ways that male genin are not and the ninja make full use of their capabilities.

Training and Skills

Ninja are schooled in their arts from childhood, with an emphasis on acrobatics, athleticism 
and stealth. Later, combat techniques are taught and after the young genin has participated 
in  one  or  two  ﬁeld  operations,  some  of  the  more  mysterious  and  esoteric  techniques  are 
introduced. The skills in which ninja are adept are as follows:
Disguise
The ninja have adopted the ‘Five Ways of Going’, which allow them to travel incognito beyond 
their  communities. The  Five Ways  are  as  a  travelling  entertainer;  a  wandering  Shinto  priest, 
welcome in most places in Japan; the simple peasant; the merchant – a profession that is expected 
to enquire into the business of other communities in search of trade; and the masseur (sometimes 
pretending to be blind), a profession that many who are relaxed will speak freely to. Ninja can 
be expected to own the garb and know the habits of each of these Five Ways of Going and to be 
able to play the role perfectly.

Sign Language
The ninja sign language of kuji-kuri is designed for subtle, silent communication. Different 
clans have their own variations but the basic structure is the same for all ninja.

Sleight
Ninja are masters of manipulating small items, palming them expertly without detection.

Stealth
A skill taught from an early age, the expert ninja knows how to use natural cover, light and 
shadow to avoid detection and to move with almost total silence even in the stillest of conditions.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

109

Special Techniques
Escape (DEX+INT)
The art of nawanukejutsu is taught to older genin. It is the ability to escape from bonds and to 
squeeze the body into gaps and through openings that would usually be too small for someone of 
the same SIZ. When using the Escape skill to break free of bonds or shackles, the Games Master 
should assign the bonds a STR score according to the type of material and how expertly it has been 
secured. A well-knotted rope binding, for example, might have a rating of 50 or 60; a wooden yolk 
might be 70 or 80. The ninja then matches his Escape against the STR of the bond in an opposed 
test in order to free himself.

In squeezing through small spaces, assign the aperture a SIZ rating, using the ninja’s own 
SIZ as a guide. A ninja can squeeze effectively reduce his own SIZ by 1 for every 30% (up 
to a maximum of –5 SIZ) he has in the nawanukejutsu skill by compacting himself and if 
necessary, voluntarily dislocating joints. It takes a full round for the ninja to squeeze into or 
through the aperture and a successful test is required to complete the action in that round. 
If the ninja fumbles the test, he is stuck for 1D4 rounds.

Lore (Yogen) INT
This is the knowledge of special compounds – dusts, pastes, potions and poisons that ninja put 
to a variety of uses. No doubt based on sorcerous alchemical knowledge, ninja Yogen can be used 
to identify the components of a compound, ﬁnd components and given the right equipment and 
time, make any of the compounds listed in the Ninja Equipment section, below.

The Role of the Ninja
The traditional view of the night-clad assassin, armed with a straight-bladed katana (the ninja-
to) and all manner of small throwing weapons such as shuriken, is ingrained into the imagery of 
Japanese adventure stories. However, for the most part, ninja were – and are, in Samurai of Legend 
– spies, saboteurs and protectors ﬁrst and foremost. Sorcerers, cut-off from the wider world, 
require constant information and rely on their ninja to bring it to them. The plans and schemes 
of the ruling clans need to be thwarted and so the ninjas’ talents in sabotage and trickery come 
to the fore. Martial skills and ruthlessness are employed in protecting the sorcerer from harm, 
rather than for persecuting enemies (a sorcerer can summon creatures to do that). Occasionally, 
there will be times where an opponent needs to be silenced or a ﬁgurehead murdered, in order 
to maintain secrecy or make a particular point. For such missions as assassination, where the 
risks  are  extremely  high  and  the  chances  of  success  low,  ninja  may  well  be  employed.  Ninja 
are not a cheap, expendable commodity; training takes years of dedication and few sorcerers 
would squander such a loyal an effective resources by constantly sending their ninja or suicidal 
assassination attempts.

Ninja Equipment
The ninja employ all kinds of specialist items to achieve their goals.

Compounds
Ninja  compounds  are  plant  and  mineral  based  concoctions  designed  to  aid  the  ninja  in  his 
various assignments.

110
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Smokescreen
This ﬁne, silvery powder, when ignited with a ﬂame or from a hot coal (see Firepot, below) gives 
out an acrid, dense smoke that the ninja can use to debilitate and distract enemies and make a 
rapid escape. A single dose covers a radius of six metres and those caught within it must make a 
Resilience test to avoid a ﬁt of choking coughs and a penalty of –40% to all Perception tests for 
1D6 Combat Rounds. A single small pouch contains one dose.

Sleeping Draught
A  sweet-smelling  brown  powder  that  can  be  dissolved  in  liquid  (warm  sake  works  best)  that 
induces  a  deep,  snoring  sleep  in  the  imbiber.  One  dose  affects  one  cup  of  liquid.  A  pouch 
contains up to ﬁve doses.

Type:  Ingested 
Delay:  1D3 minutes
Potency:  70
Full Effect:  Victim falls asleep
Duration:  1D3 hours

Venom of the Tatsu
A poison smeared onto the blade of a ninja-to, tanto or caltrops. It is thick and black, drying to 
a sticky sheen.

Type:  Smeared
Delay:  Immediate
Potency:  78
Full Effect:  1 Hit Point damage to the location struck, applies –6 penalty to victim’s DEX
Duration:  3D10 minutes
 
Beggar’s Salve
This pale green paste, when rubbed into the skin, gives an unhealthy complexion but no further ill 
effects (although it has a vague, sulphurous odour). It lasts until washed out with clean, hot water. 
This forms part of the ninja’s disguise repertoire. One dose covers the hands, arms, face and feet.

General Equipment
Climbing Pole
A collapsible bamboo pole with one clawed end. It can extend from approximately 40cm up to 
700cm and is reinforced to accept up to SIZ 16 in weight. Using the pole to scale walls gives a 
+10% bonus to Athletics tests. As well as being used for climbing, it doubles as either a jo or bo 
staff when used offensively (AP2, HP8). 

Entry Equipment
Containing a small saw, a spade and various lock-picking tools, the entry equipment is essential for 
gaining swift, silent entry to premises. The lock picks provide a +10% bonus to Mechanism tests.

Firepot
A hand-sized ceramic pot that holds a hot coal and insulated so that it can be carried within 
clothing. Used for keeping a ninja warm on long, cold surveillance and for lighting combustibles.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

111

Hooked Gloves (Nekode)
Thick hooks are set into a strap that ﬁts around the user’s palm and are used as an aid to climbing, 
giving a +10% bonus.

Rope Ladders
Coming in an assortment of lengths, rope ladders fold into a very small, compact bundle easily 
concealed within clothing. Equipped with strong hooks at one end, a single rope ladder can 
support up to SIZ 40 in weight and gives a +15% bonus to Athletics tests.

Weapons
Ninja-to
The ninja straight-sword, fashioned in a similar way to a katana but with a straight blade that is mid-
way in length between a katana and Wakazashi. See the Weapons section of the Equipment chapter.

The scabbard of the ninja-to has several practical uses. The closed end can be removed to make 
the scabbard into a breathing tube, a blowgun or a means of scattering powders; the sword can 
be drawn and secured with the scabbard’s cord to form a probing pole.

Shinobi-kyu
Of similar length to a han kyu or short bow, the shinobi-kyu is collapsible and concealable but 
at the expense of its overall strength and damage.

Ninja Characters
All ninja characters, despite being outwardly of the heimin class, treat their cultural background 
as ryoko (see the Character Creation chapter). All ninja have Language (Kuji-kuri) at +50%

Professional skills are as follows; Basic Skills: Perception +10%, Stealth +10%, Pick Three from: 
Acrobatics  +10%;  Athletics  +10%,  Persistence  +10%,  Resilience  +10%,  Sleight  +10%,  1H 
Sword (Kenjutsu) +10%, Bow (Kyujutsu) +10%, Dagger (Tantojutsu) +10%, Unarmed +10%

Advanced Skills: Pick One from: Disguise, Escape, Lore (Yogen), Mechanisms, Survival, 

Ninja  characters  accrue  On  in  the  same  way  as  any  other  character.  However,  if  caught  or 
exposed, their On is treated is effectively zero for the purposes of dealing with non-ninja.

Ninja do not traditionally use magic, preferring to rely on their own abilities. However, since so 
many serve a sorcerer, there is a chance that they will receive sorcerous aid for particularly daring, 
difﬁcult to dangerous missions. Those ninja who excel, moving onto the chunin or jonin ranks 
may very well be taught a small amount of sorcery as both a reward and to aid them in their 
ongoing service to the youjutsusha they serve and protect.

112
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

creatures of japan

Japan is ﬁlled with legends of ghosts, unquiet spirits, evil demons, mischievous demi-humans 
and  of  course,  kami  and  dragons.  Some  co-exist  more  or  less  peacefully  with  humans  whilst 
others seek to dominate, subjugate and pervert and are the targets of samurai quests and battles. 
This chapter details the classic Japanese creatures of myth and offers suggestions for including 
them in Samurai of Legend games

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Bakemono

The bakemono are the goblins of ancient Japan. Human-like in form but always considerably 
ugly, they are tormentors and persecutors, seeking to displace humans with their cruel ways and 
dishonourable practices. Their resentment is founded on jealousy and many bakemono seek to 
emulate the courtly ways of Heian culture but being primarily driven by hatred for true beauty, 
fail to realise their goals. 

The bakemono practice their own, twisted version of Buddhism, which takes the vengeful aspects 
of the Myo-O and other Buddhas and melds them with the vile oni who spring from Hell itself. 
They hate the kami, who represent everything they cannot be and are in the habit of desecrating 
shrines and imposing pollution on isolated Shinto priests, sniggering at their clever cruelty.

The  bakemono  are  ruled  by  a  stronger,  taller  species;  the  dai-bakemono. The  dai-bakemono 
would ape the samurai and daimyo, affecting their dress and manners but being disdainful of 
notions of honour – though they may act honourably, there is little substance in it. 

The statistics below detail standard bakemono. Dai bakemono have an additional 1D6 STR and 
SIZ. Dai bakemono are often found wearing scraps of samurai armour and carrying tachis and 
katanas, whenever they can capture them.

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
2D6+3
2D6+3
2D6+3
3D6
3D6
3D6
1D6

Average
9
9
9
11
10
11
4

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-9
10-12
13-15
16-18
19-20

Hit Location
Right Hind Leg
Left Hind Leg
Hindquarters
Forequarters
Right Front Leg
Left Front Leg
Head

AP/HP
–/4
–/4
–/5
–/6
–/3
–/3
–/4

Combat Actions 2
Damage Modiﬁer -1D2 
Magic Points 10
Movement 8m
Strike Rank +11

Armour: None, no Armour Penalty.

Traits: Night Sight

Skills: Athletics 50%, Evade 50%, Perception 
35%, Resilience 35%, Stealth 85%

Weapons
 
Type  
Yari 
 
Han kyu   

Range 
-- 
70m 

Size 
L 
L 

Reach 
VL 
-- 

 

Damage 
1D10, Impale 
1D8+1, Impale 

AP/HP
3/10 
2/4

Combat Styles
Yari 45%, Han kyu 50%

114
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Gaki

Also known as ‘hungry ghosts’ Gaki are semi-corporeal creatures that are the condemned and 
restless forms of those who succumbed to greed and gluttony in their previous life. Gaki are 
humanlike  in  appearance,  with  corpse-grey  skin,  dark,  beady,  hate-ﬁlled  eyes,  a  constricted 
mouth and slender neck and an enormous, bloated belly that spills forward and almost down to 
the knees. Gaki can press themselves through very narrow gaps, owing to their semi-corporeal 
nature but are still susceptible to physical attacks and damage.

Gaki eat anything and everything – hence their distended bellies – yet with their tiny mouths 
and throats, they have difﬁculty cramming in as much as they desire. A feeding gaki therefore 
shovels as much food into its mouth as it can, allowing its cheeks to swell and then swallows in 
tiny, gasping gulps, frequently gagging and choking as the food lodges in the gullet. Yet their 
inability to swallow effectively does not quell their appetite: nothing does. Given time, a single 
gaki can lay waste to an entire paddy ﬁeld or grain store, its belly swelling to an ever greater size 
as it does so.

Cursed by Buddha, gaki are especially bitter and fond of decimating the stores and crops of 
Buddhist temples, and of drinking the puriﬁcation water found outside Shinto shrines, which 
renders it unclean. If challenged, gaki usually try to escape but will ﬁght if necessary, scratching 
and kicking with their wickedly long and clawed ﬁngers, searching for things such as eyes that 
can be plucked and consumed.

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
2D6+3
3D6
5D6
3D6
3D6
3D6
1D6

Average
9
11
18
11
10
11
4

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-9
10-12
13-15
16-18
19-20

Hit Location
Right Hind Leg
Left Hind Leg
Hindquarters
Forequarters
Right Front Leg
Left Front Leg
Head

AP/HP
–/6
–/6
–/8
–/7
–/5
–/5
–/6

Combat Actions 2
Damage Modiﬁer  +1D2 
Magic Points 10
Movement 3m (due to belly)
Strike Rank +11

Armour: None, no Armour Penalty.

Traits: Night Sight

Skills:  Evade  30%,  Perception  35%, 
Persistence 115%, Resilience 90%

Weapons
Type  
Scratch 

 
 

Combat Styles
Scratch 55%

Range 
-- 

Size 
S 

Reach 
M 

Damage 
1D8 

 
 

AP/HP
As Arms

Notes: Gaki sustain half damage from normal weapons and full damage from weapons that are 
blessed by a Buddhist priest.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

115

Ghosts

Ghosts and malicious spirits abound in Japan. Souls denied Heaven, Paradise or Hell and forced 
to wander the Earth until they have found a way to lay whatever troubled them or caused their 
torment to rest. Ghosts therefore take many forms; from the disgraced samurai who committed 
seppuku but still feels deep shame for his deeds, through to truly malevolent ghosts seeking to 
punish any and all who cross their path.

Ghosts are non-corporeal and pass naturally through all physical objects. Destroying them means 
laying the disturbed soul to rest and whilst an exorcism ritual might send the ghost away, curing 
an unquiet spirit (or kwaidan) is more a matter of ﬁnding the cause of the ghost’s torment and 
doing whatever is required to satisfy the spirit’s unarticulated needs.

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
--
--
--
3D6
3D6
--
3D6

Average
--
--
--
10
10
--
10

1D20 Hit Location
1-3
4-6
7-9
10-12
13-15
16-18
19-20 Head

Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm

AP/HP
-/10
-/10
-/10
-/10
-/10
-/10
-/10

Combat Actions 2
Damage Modiﬁer --
Magic Points 10

Movement 10m
Strike Rank +20

Weapons
Type  
Dependent on type of ghost encountered

Range 

Size 

Reach 

Armour: None, no Armour Penalty.

Traits: Dark Sight, Life Sense, Magic Sense, Night 
Sight

Skills:  Evade  40%,  Lore  (Spirit  World),  30%, 
Persistence 50%, Stealth 50%

Damage 

 

AP/HP

Combat Styles
Dependent on type of ghost encountered

Special Rules
Ghosts appear in all types, from the wailing spouse who constantly cries for her long lost family, 
to the disgruntled Ronin Samurai who drowned in a marsh years ago. Some are armed and some 
are not.

116
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Hengeyokai

The hengeyokai are shape-shifters, being able to change between animal and human forms with 
ease. Whether these are animals enchanted with the power or turn into humans or vice-versa, 
is unknown. Some believe hengeyokai are kami who have chosen a physical form and prefer to 
remain within it, whilst others believe that hengeyokai are cursed to adopt a state between animal 
and man but be accepted by neither.

It is possible that every animal found in Japan has a hengeyokai counterpart but a small number of 
deﬁnite hengeyokai are known to exist: henge-I (boar), henge-inu (dog), henge-neko (cat), henge-
nezumi (rat), henge-saru (monkey), henge-U (hare). Note that the kitsune, which is a fox capable 
of taking human shape, is not classed as hengeyokai and is examined in more detail in this chapter.

In human shape hengeyokai retain the key characteristics of their animal form. For example, 
henge-neko  are  aloof,  meticulously  clean  and  may  have  cat-like  eyes  and  long,  perfectly 
manicured nails. Henge-I are large, gruff, hirsute and may have prominent lower teeth. In their 
animal form they retain the ability to reason and speak. Changing from one form to another 
costs the hengeyokai 1 Magic Point for each transformation, which takes 1D6 Combat Rounds 
to take effect, during which the hengeyokai is helpless as its form shifts to the new shape. Once 
changed, the hengeyokai has all the characteristics and abilities relevant to its form.

Hengeyokai tend to be solitary creatures, ﬁnding little acceptance amongst their animal cousins. 
In human circles they are distrusted and usually shunned, even though most hengeyokai do little 
to encourage such attitudes.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

117

Henge-I (Boar)
In human form, big, powerfully built individuals with a great deal of thick body hair and ﬂattened, 
snout-like noses and sometimes, prominent lower teeth. Henge-I are taciturn as humans, preferring 
to be left alone and becoming aggressive if pestered. In boar form they are powerful creatures that 
prefer the forests and woodlands.

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
3D6+6
2D6+9
2D6+3
5
3D6
3D6
5

Average
20
15
10
5
10
10
5

1D20
1-2
3-4
5-7
8-10
11-13
14-16
17-20

Hit Location
Right Rear Leg
Left Rear Leg
Hindquarters
Forequarters
Right Front Leg
Left Front Leg
Head

AP/HP
2/5
2/5
2/6
2/7
2/4
2/4
2/5

Combat Actions 2
Damage Modiﬁer +1D2
Magic Points 10
Movement 8m
Strike Rank +7

Armour: Hide, No Armour Penalty.

Traits: None

Skills: Athletics 25%, Evade 55%, Perception 
50%, Resilience 40%, Stealth 55%, Survival 
50%, Track 25%

Weapons
Type  
Tusk 

Range 
-- 

Size 
M 

Reach 
T 

Damage 
1D8 

 
 

AP/HP
As for Head

Combat Styles
Tusk 45%

118
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Henge-inu (Dog)
In human form henge-inu are inquisitive, highly territorial and usually hungry. Many have wet 
noses and like to pant continuously. They are also excitable but deeply loyal, especially to those 
who offer them friendship (and food).

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
1D6+1
3D6
1D6
5
1D6+6
2D6+6
5

Average
4
11
3
5
9
13
5

1D20
1-2
3-4
5-7
8-10
11-13
14-16
17-20

Hit Location
Right Hind Leg
Left Hind Leg
Hindquarters
Forequarters
Right Front Leg
Left Front Leg
Head

AP/HP
–/3
–/3
–/4
–/5
–/2
–/2
–/3

Combat Actions 3
Damage Modiﬁer -1D6 
Magic Points 9
Movement 12m
Strike Rank +9

Armour: None.

Traits: Night Sight

Skills: Athletics 60%, Evade 30%, Perception 
55%, Resilience 30%, Stealth 45%, Survival 
30%, Track 75%

Weapons
Type  
Bite 

Range 
-- 

Size 
S 

Reach 
T 

Damage 
1D6 

 
 

AP/HP
As for Head

Combat Styles
Bite 40%

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

119

Henge-neko (Cat)
Usually taking the form of a woman, henge-neko are aloof and keep themselves meticulously 
clean. They are also absolutely stubborn, unwilling to do anything that is not to their immediate 
comfort or advantage. However, when a henge-neko falls in love or takes a shine to someone, the 
attention is unrelenting and they require constant affection and praise to prevent them becoming 
sulky and petulant if it is not offered readily and frequently.

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
1D3+1
2D6
1D3+1
3D6
3D6
3D6+6
3D6+3

Average
3
7
3
11
11
14
12

1D20
1-2
3-4
5-7
8-10
11-13
14-16
17-20

Hit Location
Right Hind Leg
Left Hind Leg
Hindquarters
Forequarters
Right Front Leg
Left Front Leg
Head

AP/HP
–/2
–/2
–/3
–/4
–/2
–/2
–/2

Combat Actions 3
Damage Modiﬁer -1D6
Magic Points 11
Movement 12m
Strike Rank +13

Armour: None, No Armour Penalty.

Traits: Night Sight

Skills: Athletics 90%, Evade 90%, Persistence 
75%, Perception 65%, Resilience 30%, Stealth 
95%,  

Survival 60%, Track 75%

Weapons
Type  
Bite 
Claw 

Range 
-- 
-- 

Size 
S 
S 

Reach 
T 
S 

Damage 
1D4+1 
1D6 

 
 
 

AP/HP
As for Head
As for Legs

Combat Styles
Bite 40%, Claw 55%

Weapons
Type 
 
 
Bite 
Claw 
 

Weapon Skill 
40% 
55% 

 
 

Damage
1D4+1–1D6
1D6–1D6

120
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Henge-nezumi (Rat) 
Henge-nezumi are the most despised of all hengeyokai and whilst their human form is unkempt, 
frequently dirty and of a distinct, rat-like appearance, they do little that can be construed as 
being hostile or disruptive.

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
1D3
2D6
1D3
3D6
3D6
3D6+6
2D6

Average
2
7
2
11
11
14
7

1D20
D20
1-2
3-4
5-7
8-10
11-13
14-16

Hit Location
Hit Location
Right Hind Leg
Left Hind Leg
Hindquarters
Forequarters
Right Front Leg
Left Front Leg

AP/HP
AP/HP
–/1
–/1
–/2
–/3
–/1
–/1

Combat Actions 3
Damage Modiﬁer -1D8
Magic Points 11
Movement 10m
Strike Rank +13

Armour: None.

Traits: Night Sight

Skills:  Acrobatics  80%,  Athletics  90%, 
Evade  90%,  Persistence  75%,  Perception 
70%,  Resilience  80%,  Stealth  115%, 
Survival 80%, Track 35%    

Weapons
Type  
Bite 
Claw 

Range 
-- 
-- 

Size 
S 
S 

Reach 
T 
S 

Damage 
1D4 
1D6 

 
 
 

AP/HP
As for Head
As for Legs

Combat Styles
Bite 40%, Claw 55%

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

121

Henge-saru (Monkey)
In animal form the henge-saru resemble the indigenous Japanese monkey, the macaque and in 
human form a small, lively-eyed, red-faced old man, stooped but not bowed and surprisingly 
agile.  Henge-saru  enjoy  practical  jokes,  riddles  and  especially  haiku  contests,  where  the 
competitors attempt to compose the most spiritually enlightening, elegant and philosophically 
complex  traditional  Japanese  poem.  If  they  lose,  which  is  rare,  they  can  become  very  short-
tempered.

Buddhists consider the henge-saru not a cursed species, as they do most hengeyokai but a blessed 
one, as the monkey ﬁgures large in Buddhist teachings and is considered a semi-sacred animal. 
Henge-saru have therefore been known to join Buddhist orders.

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
2D6+1
2D6+3
1D6+3
3D6+6
3D6
3D6+6
3D6

Average
8
9
5
14
11
14
11

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-9
10-12
13-15
16-18
19-20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
–/3
–/3
–/4
–/5
–/2
–/2
–/3

Combat Actions 3
Damage Modiﬁer -1D4 
Magic Points 11
Movement 8m
Strike Rank +14

Weapons
Range 
Type  
Bite 
-- 
Unarmed -- 
 
Combat Styles
Bite 50%, Unarmed 45%

Size 
S 
M 

Armour: None.

Traits: None.

Skills:  Acrobatics  60%,  Artistic  Expression 
(Haiku)  80%,  Athletics  70%,  Evade  40%, 
Lore  (Buddhist  Theology)  35%,  Perception 
60%, Stealth 30%, Survival 40%

Reach 
T 
M 

Damage 
1D6 
1D6 

 
 
 

AP/HP
As for Head
As for Arms

122
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Henge-U (Hare)
In human shape henge-U have prominent ears and wide eyes, coupled with a furtive expression. 
They  do  not  especially  like  human  company  and  prefer  to  keep  themselves  away  from  large 
settlements, although they are not antagonistic to humans as such and there are tales of henge-U 
saving human lives or showing great kindness.

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
1D3+2
2D6
1D3
3D6
3D6
4D6+6
2D6

Average
3
7
2
11
11
17
7

1D20
1-2
3-4
5-7
8-10
11-13
14-16
17-20

Hit Location
Right Hind Leg
Left Hind Leg
Hindquarters
Forequarters
Right Front Leg
Left Front Leg
Head

AP/HP
–/2
–/2
–/3
–/4
–/2
–/2
–/2

Combat Actions 3
Damage Modiﬁer -1D8 
Magic Points 11
Movement 8m
Strike Rank +14

Armour: None.

Traits: None

Skills: Athletics 115%, Evade 115%, 
Persistence 45%, Perception 70%, Resilience 
50%, Stealth 115%, Survival 80%

Weapons
Type  
Bite 

Range 
-- 

Size 
S 

Reach 
T 

Damage 
1D4 

 
 

AP/HP
As for Head 

Combat Styles
Bite 30%

Weapons
 
Type 
Bite 
 

Weapon Skill 
30% 

 

Damage
1D4–1D8

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

123

Kappa (River Child)

Kappa are ancient water spirits with physical form and left upon the world to cause mischief 
and test the mortals’ faith in mystery and nature. They are childish pranksters with generations’ 
worth of tricks and lessons to unleash upon those who draw near to their river’s banks. A kappa 
uses its power and environment to teach others how to respect the river and its  inhabitants, 
sometimes with deadly results.

Every kappa looks identical to one another. Standing as tall as a lanky child or common human 
female, they have scaly  skin and a turtle-like shell on their backs. They have webbed  ﬁngers 
that end in small but sharp claws that they use to defend themselves, while their toes are simply 
webbed and ﬂipper-like. Kappas are the colour of muddy algae and moss, with their bright white 
eyes peering out of their dun colouration. Their most interesting feature however, is on top of 
their stocky, beaked head. They have a thick bony ridge that forms a bowl-like depression on the 
top of their skull, which is always ﬁlled with water.

This depression is their mystic link to the river and its powers and it has several magical properties. 
So long as the kappa has water in its head it has all of the energy and motivation it needs to play 
pranks or ﬁght battles, depending on the need at the time. It not only fuels their body and their 
magics but it also exists as the only way to truly defeat a kappa.

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
2D6+4
4D6
2D6+2
3D6
4D6
3D6
2D6+4

Average
11
15
9
11
15
11
11

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-9
10-12
13-15
16-18
19-20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
1/5
1/5
1/6
1/7
1/4
1/4
4/5

Armour:  Thick  Hide  and  Ridged  Head,  No 
Armour Penalty.

Traits: Excellent Swimmer, Immunity to Water 
(see  Notes),  Night  Sight,  Regeneration  (see 
Notes)

Skills: Artistic Expression (calligraphy) 85%,  
Athletics  50%  (80%),  Courtesy  75%,  Evade 
40%,  First  Aid  55%,  Inﬂuence  45%,  Lore 
(rivers)  95%,  Perception  55%,  Persistence 
40%,  Resilience  35%,  Divine  Magic  (Water 
based spells) 70%, Stealth 65%

Combat Actions 2

Damage Modiﬁer -1D2
Magic Points 11

8m 

Movement 
swimming)
Strike Rank +11

(10m 

124
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Weapons
Type  
Claw 

Range 
-- 

Size 
S 

Reach 
M 

Damage 
1D4+1 

 
 

AP/HP
As for Arms

Combat Styles
Claw 50%

Notes: Kappas are utterly dependant on the energised water resting in the depression at the top 
of their head. No matter how they fall, ﬂy, move or get knocked around this water will not spill 
unless a Precise Attack is made speciﬁcally to splash out the water. There is 10 Hit Points worth 
of water ﬁlling the depression, it has no AP and attacking it causes no direct damage to the 
kappa. When the water is driven to 0 however, the following effects occur:
•   The kappa is instantly paralysed except for its powers of speech.
•	
•	 The kappa cannot lie, withhold information or deceive in any way while ‘empty’.

 The kappa loses 1 Hit Point from all Hit Locations every minute it is ‘empty’.

Anyone reﬁlling the kappa’s depression before it dies will instantly earn a single task from the 
kappa, which it will perform to the best of its abilities exactly as the asking person wishes.

It takes a great deal of effort but by getting the water out of a kappa is akin to stealing all of its 
power and life force. Eventually an empty kappa will dry up like a husk and die, ending what was 
likely to be a centuries-old existence. This risk is why a kappa is bound by honour and duty to 
help anyone who saves it from this painful end. Ancient legends speak of kappa writing poems 
that could melt any frozen heart or swimming a message an ocean away for their saviours; the 
perfect prize for the mercy it was shown.

The  best  way  to  cause  a  kappa  to  spill  its  precious  life-water  is  to  give  it  cause  to  bow  low 
enough. Simply making a bow is not enough; kappa are wily beasts and used to such tricks. 
Instead, characters are allowed to engage the kappa in an Opposed contest using the character’s 
On against the kappa’s Courtesy skill. If the character succeeds, the kappa loses 1D10 points of 
water (see below) from its skull depression. If the test is a critical success, then all the water is lost 
in one go, as the kappa prostrates itself.

Regeneration: At the end of any Combat Round where the kappa still has water in its depression, 
it regenerates a number of Hit Points equal to the amount of water left, divided in any way the 
kappa sees ﬁt.

Water Immunity: All kappa can breathe water and air normally, never suffering damage from 
suffocation from either.

Magic: Kappa have a variety of water-based magic taken from the Divine spells in the Legend 
Core Rulebook.

The  shell  (abdomen  and  chest  locations)  of  a  kappa  has  the  listed  AP  against  any  attacks 
originating from the front but counts as having an AP 6 against attacks from the side or rear.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

125

Kirin (Dragon Horse, Wind Stallion)

A symbol of a clear sky and pleasant weather in oriental civilisations, the kirin is a good-natured 
wind spirit that has taken on the physical form of a somewhat draconic horse that can ﬂy without 
wings. It ﬂoats on air currents and gallops on the clouds in search of villains to vanquish and 
heroes to lend aid to, swooping down from above without warning or invitation.

A kirin is a golden-hued horse that is covered in ﬁne fur, its wispy silver mane and tail blowing 
like strands of silk in an unseen breeze at all times. It has deep and intelligent eyes the colour 
of a summer sky and a unique face that looks almost draconic in how it is shaped rather than 
being equine. At the top of its head, where its mane begins to grow, are two antler-like horns 
cast of pure and shining silver. These horns are the kirin’s primary physical weaponry but there is 
something to them that makes them look more like jewellery than anything else.

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
4D6+6
4D6+6
4D6+4
2D6+6
4D6
5D6
4D6

Average
21
21
19
13
15
18
19

1D20
1-2
3-4
5-7
8-10
11-13
14-16
17-20

Hit Location
Right Hind Leg
Left Hind Leg
Hindquarters
Forequarters
Right Front Leg
Left Front Leg
Head

AP/HP
4/8
4/8
4/9
4/9
4/8
4/8
6/8

Combat Actions 3

Damage Modiﬁer +1D6
Magic Points 15

Movement 
Strike Rank +16

Armour: Tough Hide, Horned Head, no Armour 
Penalty.

Traits: Formidable Natural Weaponry, Night 
Sight

Skills: Athletics 85%, Evade 50%, Evaluate 55%, 
Inﬂuence 65%, Lore (World) 65%, Perception 
105%, Persistence 70%, Resilience 60%, Divine 
Magic 80%, Survival 45%, Track 55%

Weapons
Type  
Gore 
Kick 

 
 
 

Range 
-- 
-- 

Size 
M 
M 

Reach 
T 
M 

Damage 
1D8 
1D6 

 
 
 

AP/HP
As for Head
As for Legs

Combat Styles
Gore 65%, Kick 70%

Notes: Kirin are directly tied to clouds and the sky and tends to use magic that is based on air. 
Use spells from the Legend Core Rulebook are related to air, such as Call Winds.

Kirin deal an extra 1D6 damage when their Gore is used with a Charge action.

126
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Kitsune

The kitsune are the fox spirits closely associated with the god Inari. Like hengeyokai, they can 
assume human or animal form at will but they are quite separate as species and sacred to those 
who follow Inari’s teachings.

In human form kitsune take on the appearance of aristocrats, often samurai and behave as such. 
They are, however, very mischievous, taking delight in intrigues and rumour mongering to see 
what the effects might be. When caught out and confronted they are genuinely remorseful but 
it is short-lived and they are soon up to their old tricks.

Kitsune can have multiple tails and tails are not always masked when they assume human form. 
Each 3 points of POW a kitsune has above 13 indicates an extra tail. They adore magic of all 
kinds and are keen to learn whatever spells they can and this curiosity is often the cause of some 
of their trickery and deceit.

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
1D3+3
2D6
1D3+3
4D6
4D6
4D6+6
3D6

Average
4
7
2
14
14
17
11

1D20
1-2
3-4
5-7
8-10
11-13
14-16
17-20

Hit Location
Right Hind Leg
Left Hind Leg
Hindquarters
Forequarters
Right Front Leg
Left Front Leg
Head

AP/HP
–/2
–/2
–/3
–/4
–/2
–/2
–/2

Combat Actions 3
Damage Modiﬁer -1D8
Magic Points 14
Movement 8m
Strike Rank +14

Armour: None

Traits: Night Sight

Skills: Athletics 80%, Evade 80, Persistence 
45%, Perception 70%, Resilience 50%, Stealth 
115%, Survival 80%

Weapons
Type  
Bite 

Range 
-- 

Size 
M 

Reach 
T 

Damage 
1D4 

 
 

AP/HP
As for Head

Combat Styles
Bite 60%

Notes: Kitsune typically have 1D4 Divine Magic spells available at a chance to cast equal to 
POW+INT%.

128
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Mujina

Humanlike,  Mujina  are  supernatural  creatures  delighting  in  sending  men  mad.  By  day  they 
resemble comely and often beautiful, women who go out of their way to seduce the unwary, the 
gullible and the lustful. At night, the seduction complete, they drop their pretence, revealing 
their true form.

A mujina has no face. Instead is a dark, deep, mind-shattering abyss that is impossible for the mind 
to comprehend. Peering into the facial void saps the spirit and the will, allowing the mujina to 
grow stronger. The victim must make an Opposed Persistence test against the mujina’s Persistence. 
If he fails, he loses 1D8 points of INT immediately. If the test is fumbled, the INT loss is 2D8. 
Being reduced to half original INT results in complete insanity and the victim is left a gibbering, 
useless wreck, although able to ﬂee, screaming, into the night.

If the victim is successful in the Opposed test, he can retaliate but must continue to make an 
Opposed  test  for  each  Combat  Round  he  continues  to  look  at  the  mujina.  If  the  success  is 
critical, then the test must be made every other Combat Round and the INT loss, if incurred, is 
1D6 rather than 1D8.

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
3D6
3D6
3D6
3D6
3D6
3D6
3D6

Average
11
11
11
11
10
11
11

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-9
10-12
13-15
16-18
19-20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
–/4
–/4
–/5
–/6
–/3
–/3
–/4

Combat Actions 2
Damage Modiﬁer -- 
Magic Points 10
Movement 8m
Strike Rank +11

Armour: None

Traits: Cause madness (see above)

Skills:  Athletics  35%,  Evade  35%, 
Perception 35%, Persistence 95%, Resilience 
35%, Seduction 85%

Weapons
Type  
Tanto 

Range 
-- 

Size 
S 

Reach 
S 

Damage 
 
1D4+1 Bleed, Impale 

 

AP/HP
5/5

Combat Styles
Tanto 45%
 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

129

Mukade

The  mukade  are  the  legendary  monster  centipedes  of  the  kind  killed  by  the  hero  Hidesato. 
Rumours abound of the return of these creatures in the hills north of Lake Biwa and elsewhere 
in the south of Honshu. It is likely that the centipedes’ return is the result of sorcerous activity 
although no one can be certain that these monsters have simply not been hibernating in hidden 
caverns or at the bottom of swamps.

There is a chance equal to the centipede’s POW that, when killed, a pearl can be found within 
its skull. These pearls, by default, are the property of the Emperor and are exceedingly valuable 
items. A pearl contains 1D4–1, single-use Divine Magic spells (or any Sorcery spell from the 
Legend  Core  Rulebook)  with  a  Magnitude  of  1D4.  Identifying  what  spells  the  pearl  contains 
requires the attentions of a Buddhist priest with some skill in Divination or other method of 
insight. Using a spell requires the caster to be holding the pearl and to succeed in a test based 
on INT+POW.

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
8D6
12D6
12D6
1
2D6+3
3D6
1

Average
28
42
42
1
10
11
1

Combat Actions 2
Damage Modiﬁer +2D6 
Magic Points 10
Movement 12m
Strike Rank +6

130
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

1D20
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19-20

Hit Location
Segment 18
Segment 17
Segment 16
Segment 15
Segment 14
Segment 13
Segment 12
Segment 11
Segment 10
Segment 9
Segment 8
Segment 7
Segment 6
Segment 5
Segment 4
Segment 3
Segment 2
Segment 1
Head

AP/HP
4/5
4/5
4/5
4/5
4/5
4/5
4/5
4/5
4/5
4/5
4/5
4/5
4/5
4/5
4/5
4/5
4/5
4/5
4/8

Armour: Chitin shell, No Armour Penalty.

Traits: Poison (see below)

Skills: Athletics 60%, Perception 55%, 
Stealth 70%

Weapons
Type  
 
Mandibles 

Combat Styles
Mandibles 65%

Range 
-- 

Size 
M 

Reach 
M 

Damage 
1D8 

 
 

AP/HP
As for Head

Notes:
Centipede Venom
Type: Ingested or smeared
Delay: 1D3 Combat Rounds
Potency: 80
Full Effect:  1 Hit Point damage to location struck, applies –8 penalty to victim’s CON
Duration: 3D10 minutes

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

131

Oni (Demon)

Oni are the demons of ancient Japan and they come in many, many types. Oni come to the 
physical world at night to attack those whose souls would be better serving the Underworld 
rather than whatever it is they do in life. They are powerful creatures that know the best ways 
to cause a mortal pain and anguish, hopefully driving them to the ﬁnal conﬂict that will send 
their soul to the Oni’s dark masters in the Spirit World. In the Heian period malicious sorcerers 
summon forth oni to bargain with and encourage them to work havoc across the provinces, 
destroying  the  clans  and  grieving  the  Imperial  Court. The  oni  Lords  are  fearsome  creatures 
indeed, being utterly ruthless and without a single shred of compassion. They rage against the 
material world and the gods of Heaven and Paradise with equal fury.

Oni come in a vast array of different varieties but the main type that comes to wreak havoc upon 
the physical world are called red Oni for their crimson skin and hot rages. They are half again as tall 
as a common man and nearly a metre across from shoulder to shoulder. Tusk-like teeth and bestial 
horns grow from the creatures’ face and a long savage claw tips each of their 10 meaty ﬁngers. 
Where the red Oni are the most prevalent, all the colours of the rainbow exist amidst the Oni 
legions. Although each Oni is normally different from the next because of their individual physical 
gifts, they all are fearsome creatures that despise goodness, crushing it whenever they can.

Each Oni might ﬁght in its own way or choose a speciﬁc type of soul to target depending on 
its own individual strengths but they all seem to favour heavy eastern weapons that leave a ruin 
of  their  victims’  ﬂesh. Tetsubo  and  naginata  are  red  Oni  favourites,  with  some  preferring  to 
use their natural weapons over anything else instead. Whatever an Oni has chosen to use as its 
weapon, it can be assured that few enemies will be able to weather its attacks.

One interesting weakness that all Oni have in common is an ingrained belief that the common 
monkey is the spiritual protector of mortal souls. Whether or not this is truly the case is unknown 
to all but the gods but the Oni believe this fact to be true enough to stay away from monkeys 
while they walk the world. This legend is why many evil souls keep caged monkeys around them 
at all times – to hopefully keep the Oni away.

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
4D6
4D6
2D6+10
3D6+2
3D6+6
2D6+6
2D6

Average
15
15
17
13
17
13
7

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-9
10-12
13-15
16-18
19-20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
6/7
6/7
6/8
6/9
6/6
6/6
6/7

Combat Actions 3
Damage Modiﬁer +1D4
Magic Points 17 

Movement 8m
Strike Rank +13

132
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Armour: Tough Hide, No Armour Penalty.

Traits: Dark Sight, Night Sight, Special (see 
below)

Skills: Athletics 55%, Evade 45%, Evaluate 
55%, Inﬂuence 65%, Lore (Spirit World) 
75%, Perception 65%, Persistence 75%, 
Resilience 65%, Stealth 40%, Track 65%

Weapons
Range 
Type  
-- 
Bite 
Claw 
-- 
Naginata  -- 
Tetsubo 
-- 

Size 
M 
M 
L 
H 

Reach 
T 
S 
VL 
L 

 
 
 

 
Damage 
 
1D6+2 
1D4+2 
 
2D8 Bleed, Impale   
2D8 Stun Location   

AP/HP
As for Head
As for Arms
4/12
6/12

Combat Styles
Bite 70%, Claw 80%, Naginata 65%, Tetsubo 60%

Weapons
Type 
 
 
Bite 
Claw 
 
Naginata   
Tetsubo 
 

Weapon Skill 
70% 
80% 
65% 
60% 

 
 
 
 

Damage
1D6+2+1D4
1D4+2+1D4
1D10+1D4 (AP 4)
2D8+1D4 (AP 4)

Notes: Oni cannot tolerate the presence of monkeys and will be forced to pass Persistence tests 
each round they are to stay within 10 metres of a common animal monkey. If they pass they 
may act normally. If they fail however, they must retreat to at least that distance before taking 
any other actions.

They are immune to all kinds of poison.

Oni regenerate 1 Hit Point/Combat Round.

Oni take double damage from any weapon/object made from Ivory used in combat against them.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

133

Rokuro-kubi

Supernatural creatures, rokuro-kubi have the daytime semblance of humans but, at night, their heads, 
gullets, stomachs and intestines separate from the body, attach themselves together and the ghastly 
assemblage goes in search of live ﬂesh, preferring human whenever it can get it. The head and guts 
must rejoin with the body by daybreak or the creatures whither and die as the ﬁrst rays of the morning 
sun strike them. Their inert bodies are therefore always well-hidden and protected before the heads 
go hunting. 

In human form the neck can extend rapidly up to a length of three metres allowing the monster 
to bite at range. They are also practitioners of sorcery and are known to serve and ally with 
human sorcerers in return for protection and hunting rights. A rokuro-kubi has a chance equal 
to its POW of knowing 1D4 sorcery spells at a base score of INT+POW. If it serves a human 
sorcerer, double this chance.

Rokuro-kubi are therefore cunning, malicious and merciless killers. Like the bakemono they abhor 
the kami and are fond of shrine desecration. In human form, the head must be severed for the 
rokuro-kubi to be completely killed. They can slowly regenerate Hit Points, taking a number of 
hours equal to the total damage sustained to fully recover but recover they can. In the ﬂoating head 
state, the monsters can be killed either by being kept from the body at sunrise or being sliced into 
ribbons; the body is required to recover from damage.

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
3D6
3D6
3D6
3D6
3D6
4D6
3D6

Average
11
11
11
11
10
14
11

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-9
10-12
13-15
16-18
19-20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
–/5
–/5
–/6
–/7
–/4
–/4
–/5

Combat Actions 3
Damage Modiﬁer -- 
Magic Points 10

Movement 8m
Strike Rank +13

Armour: None.

Traits: Extending Neck (see below), 
Regeneration (Special, see above)

Skills: Athletics 40%, Evade 50%, Perception 
75%, Resilience 55%, Stealth 65%

Weapons
Type  
Katana 
 
Neck 

Range 
-- 
 
 

Size 
M 
 
-- 

Reach 
M 
 
M 

Combat Styles
Katana 50%, Neck 60%

134
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

 

Damage 
1D10+1 Bleed, Impale 
1D12+1
L 

1D6 

 

 

AP/HP
5/10

As for Head

Notes: The neck can extend by one metre for every Combat Action and the head can be aimed 
like any other weapon, to deliver a bite attack

Rokuro-kubi Hit Locations (head form)
1D20
1-17
18-20

Hit Location
Entrails
Head

AP/HP
–/5
–/5

Combat Actions 3
Damage Modiﬁer -- 
Magic Points 10
Movement 10m (ﬂying)
Strike Rank +13

Weapons
Type  
Bite 

 
 

Combat Styles
Bite 60%

Range 
-- 

Size 
S 

Reach 
T 

Damage 
1D6 

 
 

AP/HP
As for Head

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

135

Shuten-doji

The vampires of Japanese legend, shuten-doji are humanlike in appearance save for their long, sharp 
front teeth and their clawed hands. They often disguise themselves as wandering priests or ﬂute-
players, better to ingratiate themselves with travellers or small communities.

Like all vampires, shuten-doji feed on blood. They are not affected by sunlight, exorcisms or 
holy symbols but they are susceptible to certain compulsions. All shuten-doji are forced to count 
any  grains  of  rice  spread  across  their  path  and  when  reaching  any  form  of  crossroads  spend 
some time in consideration before randomly selecting their direction of travel. A shuten-doji is 
allowed a Persistence test to mask its compulsion successfully, although this can be opposed by a 
Perception test that, if successful, reveals the anxiety the vampire experiences.

Expert ﬂautists, shuten-doji produce haunting ﬂute music that lulls the senses. Match the skill of 
the vampire against the Persistence of all those it is trying to entrance in an Opposed contest. If 
successful, the shuten-doji entrances the listeners for 1D6 rounds (2D6, if the score is a critical 
success)  and  it  then  spends  the  time  biting  and  draining  blood.  It  can  drain  1D3  points  of 
blood per round, with the damage being removed from each Hit Location simultaneously. If the 
shuten-doji does not have the opportunity to use its ﬂute, it waits until the victim is asleep before 
biting. If biting in combat, it has the opportunity to draw 1D2 points of blood in addition to 
any successful bite attack.

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
4D6
3D6
3D6
3D6
3D6
4D6
3D6

Average
14
11
11
11
10
14
11

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-9
10-12
13-15
16-18
19-20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
–/5
–/5
–/6
–/7
–/4
–/4
–/5

Combat Actions 3
Damage Modiﬁer -- 
Magic Points 10

Movement 8m
Strike Rank +13 

Armour: None.

Traits:  Formidable  Natural  Weapons,  Night 
Sight

Skills:  Athletics  40%,  Courtesy  50%,  Evade 
50%,  Perception  60%,  Persistence  45%, 
Resilience 55%, Stealth 60%

Weapons
Type  
Bo 
Bite 

Range 
-- 
-- 

Combat Styles
Bo 60%, Bite 60%

Size 
M 
S 

Reach 
L 
T 

136
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

 

Damage 
 
1D8, Stun Location    
1D6 
 

 

AP/HP
3/8
As for Head

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

137

Tatsu (Dragon)

Very different to their western counterparts, Japanese dragons are celestial creatures that run through 
the air without the need for wings, are highly magical and occupy a Heavenly status on a par with the 
kami. They have little cause to dabble in human affairs and rarely travel to the Earth. When they do, 
it is always on matters of great spiritual importance or to do battle against their sworn foes, the oni.

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
6D6
7D6
4D6+15
7D6+6
6D6+10
4D6+4
5D6

Average
21
25
30
31
31
19
18

1D20
1-2
3
4 
5-8
9-12 
13-16
17
18
19-20

Hit Location
Tail
Right Hind Leg
Left Hind Leg
Lower Body
Middle Body
Upper Body
Right Front Leg
Left Front Leg
Head

AP/HP
11/11
11/11
11/11
11/13
11/13
11/13
11/11
11/11
11/11

Combat Actions 4 
Damage Modiﬁer +1D12
Magic Points 31

Movement 12m (20m ﬂying)
Strike Rank +25

Armour: Onyx Scales, No Armour Penalty.

Traits:  Breathe  Flame 
Formidable Natural Weapons, Night Sight

(5D6,  2/hour), 

Skills: Athletics 115%, Courtesy 90%, Dance 
75%,  Divine  Magic  70%,  Evaluate  105%, 
Inﬂuence  85%,  Lore  (all)  105%,  Perception 
72%, Persistence 105%, Resilience 115%, Sing 
85%, Sorcery 70%, Survival 78%, Track 75%

Weapons
Type  
Bite 
Claw 
Tail 

 
 
 
 

Range 
-- 
-- 
-- 

Size 
E 
E 
H 

Reach 
L 
VL 
VL 

Damage 
1D10 
1D8 
1D6 

 
 
 
 

AP/HP
As for Head
As for Legs
As for Tail

Combat Styles
Bite 115%, Claw 90%, Tail 105%

Type 
Bite 
 
Claw 
Tail 

 
 
 
 
 

Weapon Skill 
115% 
 
90% 
105% 

 
 
 
 

Damage
1D10+1D12 
plus 1D8 ﬁre
1D8+1D12 (AP 7)
1D6+1+1D12 (AP 9)

Notes: Any tatsu will have knowledge of 1D8 Sorcery spells and 1D6 Divine Magic spells, selected 
to  reﬂect  whatever  purpose  they  happen  to  be  pursuing. The  whole  catalogue  of  Sorcery  and 
Divine Magic is open to them.

138
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Tengu

Winged humanoids with ugly, bird-like heads and clawed feet, Tengu dwell in the mountainous 
forests. They tend to be solitary creatures and are extremely mischievous (although not outright 
evil). They like to torment and harass lonely travellers, sometimes waylaying them for hours, 
days or even months on end, simply for the amusement it affords. However, if shown courtesy 
and especially if gifted with bright, expensive things, they will be courteous in return and can 
act as helpful guides. This is very dependent on mood, however. Tengu are not human and their 
natures are peculiar to humans. Despite their fondness for pranks they hate being the victim of 
such and can turn violent or vindictive if they believe they are being mocked.

They are skilled swordsmen and have been known to offer training to those who have amused 
them and shown courtesy, although there are tales that they are demanding masters who refuse 
to let their pupils leave, even when they have learned all they possibly can.

As tengu frequent mountainous areas that are usually the realm of a major kami, they may also know 
1D4-1 Sorcery Magic spells or 1D3-1 Divine Magic spells, cast at INT+POW%.

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
3D6+3
3D6+6
2D6+3
3D6
3D6+6
3D6+6
2D6

Average
12
14
9
11
14
14
7

Combat Actions 3

Damage Modiﬁer -- 
Magic Points 14
Movement 8m, 12m ﬂying
Strike Rank 

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-9
10
11-12
13-14
15-16
17-18
19-20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Wing
Left Wing
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
1/5
1/5
1/6
1/7
1/5
1/5
–/4
–/4
1/5

Armour: Natural armour, No Armour 
Penalty.

Traits: Formidable Natural Weaponry

Skills: Athletics 40%, Evade 50%, 
Perception 55%, Persistence 60%, 
Resilience 45%

Weapons
Type  
Katana 
 
Claw 

 
 
 
 

Range 
-- 
 
-- 

Size 
M 
 
M 

Reach 
M 
 
M 

Combat Styles
Katana 75%, Claw 45%

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

 

Damage 
1D10+1 Bleed, Impale 
1D12+1
1D6+1 

 

 

 

AP/HP
5/10

As for Arms

139

ki for the sensei

This chapter provides is for the Samurai of Legend Games Master. It looks at the key themes of a 
Japanese campaign and rounds out with an introductory adventure.

Themes for Campaigns

Samurai of Legend lends itself to all kinds of adventure and some of the themes that are worth 
exploring  in  campaigns  are  sketched  below.  A  good  Samurai  of  Legend  campaign  will  take 
elements from several of these themes and develop many of the others hinted at throughout this 
book. However the key to a successful Heian Japan campaign is to understand, even at a very 
high, detailed level, the major motivations of the period. This section aims to draw out these 
motivations and spark ideas for the Games Master who is wondering how to begin a series of 
adventures in ancient Japan.

Clan Struggle
The  three  major  clans  of  the  Heian  period  –  Fujiwara,  Minamoto  and  Taira,  struggled  for 
ultimate control through most of the era in one form or another, with matters eventually coming 
a head with the Gempei Wars, which saw the Minamoto clan emerge victorious, the Taira clan 
virtually destroyed and the Fujiwara clan diminished in power and ultimately replaced by the 
ﬁrst Shogunate.

Clan struggle campaigns are based on the following kinds of element:
•	 Political, territorial and armed struggle between the major players. Raids on territory, 
insults and slurs in the Imperial Court, struggles for prestige, social intrigue as the clans 
try to marry into the Imperial Family.

•	 Low-ranking noble families attempting to ingratiate themselves with the major clans. 
Smaller clans forming from family alliances and deciding which of the major clans to 
support or remain as neutral observers.

•	 Larger clans vying for the support of small but honourable and prestigious families, in a 

bid to extend their territories

•	 Large clans fragmenting into regional subdivisions either voluntarily, through enmity or 

through a general demise in the clan’s viability

•	 The consolidation of power and luring noted warriors away from the Imperial heartland 

and into private service – the development of the samurai class

Clan struggles offer the opportunity for dynastic development, inter and intra family intrigue 
and the development of personal reputations to further the social standing one’s own family. 
Loyalty is at a premium, shame is to be avoided and allies are to be chosen carefully. The balance 
of power throughout the lower aristocracy changes with the seasons and the mood regarding the 
current Emperor and his Regent. Petty wars and battles are commonplace, both on the battleﬁeld 
and in the corridors of the capital. Powerbrokers and malcontents stir-up trouble and intrigue 

140
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

almost for the fun of it and the reputations of entire families are placed on the line as favour shifts 
from one clan to another.

Court Intrigue
Away from the clan and political struggles, life in the Imperial Court is about making a good 
impression,  establishing  the  right  connections,  ﬁnding  ways  to  thwart  the  wrong  ones  and 
being  in  the  presence  of  the  right  people,  at  the  right  time,  to  secure  personal  prestige  and 
advancement. Ladies of the Court ﬁnd themselves part of the Imperial Family as concubines on 
the strength of their ability to craft a haiku, tell a story, play the biwa or declaim the ﬁner points 
of Buddhism. Rivals to such positions gaze on with jealousy and plot subtle, intricate revenges 
that dredge-up family secrets, tenuous claims to lineage and all manner of social indiscretions 
that can tarnish or halt, courtly progress.

This  type  of  campaign  makes  change  from  the  whistle  of  arrows  and  the  clash  of  tachi  but 
involves weapons every bit as deadly and the shattering of reputations as easily as warring armies 
shatter bodies.

Defeating a Mythical Enemy
Mythical enemies abound in Heian Japan. From the giant centipedes of the kind slain by the 
hero Hidesato, through to the invasive bakemono who are intent on establishing their own 
rule in the remote northern provinces.

Generally the appearances of mythic creatures are isolated incidents but they may also indicate 
the actions of disgruntled sorcerers intent on forging mayhem. As the activities of the malevolent 
sorcerers  increase  during  the  year  1000,  more  and  more  mythical  creatures  are  appearing, 
requiring brave samurai to tackle them in the name of the Emperor, clan and personal glory.

Family Advancement
The  examples  set  by  the  Fujiwara,  Minamoto  and  Taira  clans  have  caused  more  and  more 
families to seek personal status and inﬂuence. The surest way is to gain an alliance, through 
intermarriage, with an inﬂuential clan and by association, advance its own standing. However 
there are other means: aiding a clan in battle; securing and delivering information about a clan’s 
enemies; proving indispensable in terms of lands, local inﬂuence, advice or religious piety and 
so forth.

All this advancement is performed at several levels. The family heads formulate the strategy and 
conduct the negotiations but the delivery is carried out by loyal retainers such as the samurai. 
There is the opportunity to secure personal glory in this way and to personally advance within 
the family’s status but there are risks, too. If the strategy is ill-conceived and those initiating it fail, 
blame can be laid at their door. Thus, the aspirations of a family can have profound implications 
for its servants and retainers, although the ultimate rewards will be to be beneﬁt of everybody.

Historical
The historical campaign seeks to engage the characters in the events marking the Heian period. 
The rise of the Mount Hiei monasteries; the machinations of the Fujiwara regency; the ascent of 
the Minamoto and Taira clans; the wars to push back the Ainu to Hokkaido and naturally, the 
battles of the Gempei Wars towards the end of the Heian period.

A historical campaign involves researching the period and those active in the key events. The 
timeline in the ﬁrst chapter of Samurai of Legend helps identify many of these people and the 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

141

events concerning them but the Games Master needs to conduct further research to gain a better 
understanding of the historical events and their repercussions. Good sources for information are 
the Tale of Genji and the Heike Monogatari and the Hogen Monogatari, all of which provide 
insights into the workings of the Heian period (especially the former) and the military deeds that 
shaped its ﬁnal days (the latter two).

A  historical  game  may  be  orthodox,  shunning  the  mythical  elements  threaded  throughout 
this book or include them to provide a different slant that might affect the eventual historical 
outcome. The choice depends on how much the participants want to pursue historical veracity. 
Whichever route is taken, a good historical campaign should include encounters with the great 
people of the time, such as Minamoto Yoshiie and ﬁnd ways to work the characters into the 
crucial events – either as direct protagonists or as indirect agents who inﬂuence the main events 
from the unexplored sidelines. It is also an opportunity to engage the characters in the ﬁerce 
wars of the later Heian period, which were more than simply battles for territory but battles for 
the very soul of Japan. The Gempei Wars include political double-dealing, subterfuge, shifting 
alliances, organised rebellion, imprisonments and daring escapes and desperate ﬂights for life. It 
is an exciting, adventure-packed area to explore.

Magic and Sorcery
The  Heian  Emperors,  reﬂecting  the  nervousness  of  the  powerful  Buddhist  temples,  were 
deeply fearful of magic and those who claimed to use it. Various edicts forbidding sorcery led 
to purges of its practitioners, despite the fact that the Buddhist esoteric traditions, especially 
Shugendo, dabbled in the study of magic with impunity.

Japan is a truly magical group of islands. Its gods, the kami, are real and ever-present. Magic 
can  be  found  in  the  natural  beauty  of  the  lands  and  the  mystic  beliefs  that  every  Japanese 
person is aware of from a young age. Even the Imperial Court rules through magical blessing, 
as embodied in the Imperial Regalia; when the Emperor and his family are considered to be 
living gods, the presence of magic throughout Japan is a natural consequence.

Yet magicians are rare, even in the stories and legends of the Heian period. Most people are 
happy to let the kami work magic on their behalf and even the Buddhist temples use magic 
judiciously and in pursuit of their goals, which are largely political. Japan is not a land ﬁlled with 
wizards, sorcerers or hedge magicians. Where such people exist, they are shadowy and remote. 
The samurai would never seek to learn magic to make his sword sharper or arrows more accurate 
and  so,  whilst  Japan  is  magically  rich,  encounters  with  it  are  not  everyday.  For  most,  magic 
equals wonderment and proof that the gods look after the world. When humans work it without 
the gods’ blessing, magic suddenly becomes threatening and malevolent. People fear it, for they 
cannot control it and its rarity increases its fearful potency.

Ninja
As stressed already, ninja are an anachronism imported from Japan’s future. A rationale for 
their existence is given in the Ways of the Warrior chapter and so, if they are included in a 
Heian campaign, they should be included as part of a mythic backdrop involving sorcery, 
great quests and political intrigue rather than as part of a historical recreation.

Nevertheless, the wily, cunning, black-clad ninja agent, evading the watchful eyes of samurai 
or sohei, to complete a mission of great daring and risk, is an alluring concept and the political 
situation of Heian Japan means that the ninja, had they existed, would have had many, many 
opportunities to spy, sabotage and on occasions, assassinate. Even if the rationale for sorcerers 

142
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

and sorcery is not being used, as long as everyone in the campaign welcomes the ninja as an 
acceptable anachronism, including the practitioners of ninjutsu can add a thrilling dimension 
to the game.

Proof of Loyalty
The proof of loyalty campaign can concern individual loyalty to a daimyo, a family to a clan, a clan 
to the Emperor or even priests to a temple and its faith. The need for proof to be demonstrated is 
usually triggered by some form of shame or earlier transgression, with the proof being required as 
atonement or because those involved simply wish to regain the status they have lost.

Where  loyalty  has  been  questioned,  the  stakes  are  high.  Others  will  seek  to  proﬁt  from  the 
characters’ loss, either seeking to consolidate the shame or move into the positions the characters 
or  their  superiors  occupied.  There  is  therefore  a  great  deal  of  opportunity  for  clandestine 
manoeuvrings to prevent rivals taking advantage, especially where clan loyalties are concerned.

The form that proof of loyalty takes is important to consider. To the characters it can be quite 
possible that what they are told to do conﬂicts with their own moral stance; should they sacriﬁce 
personal integrity for honour? What are the effects if they refuse? How would others seek to 
proﬁt from their refusal? If, on the other hand, there is no moral conﬂict, then it is likely that 
any task the characters must undertake to regain honour will be dangerous and likely to push the 
notion of honour to the limit. It could be a straight forward task such as retrieving a particular 
item or object or it could be something far more wide-ranging, such as taking a decisive part in 
a battle where the odds are clearly stacked against them.

On the other hand, the characters may simply wish to afﬁrm their loyalty because some kind of 
loyalty has been shown to them and thus a debt has been incurred. Here, there are opportunities 
for  endeavours  such  as  seeking  out  a  particular  gift,  helping  the  person  being  honoured  to 
achieve some form of goal or simply choosing to undertake a task that is slightly beyond their 
capabilities in order to prove worth.

Pilgrimages and Quests
Quests take many forms and are often concerned with the spiritual journey more than with the 
object of the quest itself. Pilgrimages to holy places, such as Ise, Izumo, Mount Hiei, Mount 
Fujiyama or the Eighty Eight Temples are examples of staple quests common in Japanese faith. 
There are opportunities to meet like-minded pilgrims, form friendships and aid others along the 
way. One need not be religious to undertake a spiritual or religious quest of this kind. It might 
be atonement for disloyalty or simply a proof of loyalty. It is also an excellent way of gathering 
a disparate group of characters together, meeting together at a pilgrims’ inn before setting out, 
each sharing the story of how they came to be there.

Where  a  quest  has  a  speciﬁc  goal,  such  as  slaying  a  foe  or  retrieving  some  kind  of  treasure, 
Japanese  myth  has  an  especially  rich  heritage.  Heroes  taking  up  arms  against  monsters  such 
as the centipede or re-enacting the deeds of Hachiman or Jizo, are common story themes and 
well-suited to a mythical campaign. The object of the quest may be something that will bring 
a family or clan huge prestige and as prestige and advancement are so crucial in Japan, quests 
ﬁgure large in its myths. The Shinto stories are especially rich in this regard. Izanagi’s journey to 
Hell or yomi, in search of Izanami, only to be rejected when he ﬁnds her, is typical of the kind 
of questing myth popular in Japanese folklore. The Japanese of the Heian period are extremely 
fond of such undertakings, especially where the end results are not necessarily clear cut. Simply 
undertaking a quest can bring honourable rewards, even if it does not succeed.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

143

Temple Intrigue and Conflict
The Heian period saw the clash of the great Buddhist temples of Nara and Enriaku-(cid:29)ji. These 
were not clashes over religious ideology but clashes for power. The temples exert great inﬂuence 
over  the  Emperor  and  as  the  patronage  of  the  Imperial  Court  slides  towards  the  temples  of 
Mount Hiei, the displaced temples of Nara, angered at their loss of inﬂuence, took direct action 
against  both  the  government  and  their  mountain-based  rivals. This  level  of  conﬂict  provides 
great scope for a campaign, with priests, monks and sohei actively descending on the capital to 
petition, punish and oppose the actions of rivals. When matters get out of hand in the cities and 
towns, action is directed against the temples with sohei despatched to punish and coerce simply 
in order to establish political and religious dominance.

Even within the same temple, sects vied for position and took great offence if old traditions were 
not ordered. The appointment of the abbot of a temple, for example, is a political, rather than a 
religious act and within the control of the government. If the government favours one sect over 
another for some reason, it can (and did) provoke outrage leading to violent protests, curses and 
armed sohei ready to reinforce a sect’s position or defend it. The peaceful tenets of Buddhism are 
compromised by such attitudes and the priests and monks must, at all costs, be seen to operate 
within the doctrines of Buddhism whilst still taking decisive action to retain power – that is where 
the warrior monks come into play. Later, as the Gempei Wars begin, both the Taira and Minamoto 
clans actively seek the alliance of particular temples and use many different strategies, including 
promises of power, to secure the help of a temple’s armies.

In a campaign using mythical elements the temples will actively mobilise against bakemono and 
oni seeking to subvert the divine nature of Japan. Such holy crusades receive the backing of the 
Emperor and would no doubt involve the major and minor clans, giving opportunities for glory. 
Clashes between spiritual and military leaders over strategy and tactics will be common, despite 
ﬁghting against a common enemy and the differing approaches of sohei and samurai; this ﬁrst 
driven by religious zealotry; the second by a desire for personal glory and offer an intriguing 
opportunity for rivalry whilst engaged in a common cause.

144
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

glossary

Ainu: A Caucasian race living on the island of Hokkaido. Considered to be barbarians by the 
Japanese.
Akindo: A merchant.
Amaterasu: A major goddess and kami of Shintoism. Amaterasu is revered above all other Shinto 
gods.
Amatsu-Tsumi: A form of Shinto sin.
Ame-no-Uzume: The kami of merriment.
Amida: A Buddhist deity.
Ashigaru: A warrior class drawn from the peasantry or Senmin caste.
Askuku: One of the contemplative Buddhas.
Bajutsu: The skill of riding and horsemanship.
Bakku yoraku: A Buddhist term referring to the alleviation of human suffering.
Bishamonten: A Buddhist war god.
Biwa: A lake in the Kanto plane and the largest in Japan.
Bojutsu: The skill of using the staff (bo) in combat.
Bosatsu: Mortals who have achieved Buddhist enlightenment.
Bozu: A Buddhist priest.
Buke: Minor aristocracy.
Bushi: The warrior profession.
Cha no Yu: Tea Ceremony.
Cha: Tea.
Chunin: Ninja clan adviser.
Dai Sho: Two swords worn together as a sign of samurai rank.
Dai-: a preﬁx meaning ‘Great’.
Daiitoku: One of the protective Buddhas.
Daijo Daijin: Prime Minister.
Daijo Kan: The Department of State.
Daikokuten: Buddhist god of warriors and farmers.
Daimyo: The ruling head of a clan or family. Daimyo means ‘Great Name’.
Dainagon: Ministers of State. Chief advisers.
Dainichi: One of the contemplative Buddhas.
Daishonin: A scribe.
Do: A breastplate.
Do-maru: Literally a ‘body wrapper’. Part of ashigaru armour.
Eboshi: A conical hat made of paper.
Enma- O: Buddhist guardian of Hell.
Fudo: One of the protective Buddhas.
Fuji: Mount Fujiyama, highest of the Japanese mountains.
Gaikoukan: A diplomat.
Gakusha: A scholar.
Ganjitsu: New Year and a Buddhist/Shinto festival.
Genin: Ninja clan member.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

145

Geta: Clog-like footwear.
Gin: A silver coin.
Go-Chi: Collective name for the contemplative Buddhas.
Gozanze: One of the protective Buddhas.
Gundari: One of the protective Buddhas.
Gyobu-sho: Ministry of Justice.
Hachi-maki: A headband.
Hachiman: A Buddhist and Shinto war deity.
Haidate: Armoured thigh guards.
Hanamatsuri: Buddha’s birthday, a festival day.
Hangan: A magistrate.
Haori: An everyday jacket.
Happuri: A facemask, attached to a kabuto.
Heian: The  classical  period  of  Japan,  lasting  between  794  and  1192. The  default  period  for 
RuneQuest: Land of the Samurai.
Heihaku: A paper representation of a kami’s presence. Found in Shinto shrines.
Heimin: The peasant class. Also called hyakusho.
Hi: Element of Fire.
Higan: The spring equinox. A Shinto festival.
Hiki-me: A signalling arrow.
Hiragana: One of the Japanese alphabets.
Hitsuji: A goat.
Hokkaido: Northernmost Island of the Japanese archipelago.
Hondo: Main hall of a Buddhist temple.
Hongaku shiso: The Tendai Buddhist belief in Original Enlightenment.
Hononinigi: A divine prince sent to Shikoku with the Imperial Regalia.
Honsh(cid:30): Largest of Japan’s islands.
Hyakoushou: A farmer.
Hyobu-sho: Ministry of Military Affairs.
I: A boar.
Iajutsu: Skill of drawing a sword and cutting in the same motion.
Inari: A Buddhist and Shinto deity.
Insei: ‘Cloistered Emperor’. The Insei system allowed an Emperor to retire but still continue to 
wield power without occupying the ofﬁce directly.
Inu:  A dog.
Isha: A herbalist and healer.
Iwashimizu: A Shinto festival honouring Hachiman.
Izanagi: One of the Creator deities.
Izanami: One of the Creator deities.
Jenmin: A female bard or entertainer, typically a lady of the Imperial Court.
Jibu-sho: The Ministry of Civil Affairs.
Jikoku: Buddhist guardian of the east. One of the Shi Daitenno.  
Jinaimachi: A Buddhist temple town.
Jinja: A Shinto shrine.
Jizo: A Buddhist deity – patron of travellers.
Jojiki: A peddler or travelling tinker.
Jojutsu: The skill of using the short staff (jo) in combat.
Jonin: Ninja clan elder.
Jujutsu: A Martial Art similar to judo.
J(cid:30)zenkai: The 10 precepts of Buddhism.
Ka: Element of Metal.
Kabuto: A helmet.

146
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Kaishakunin: Assistant present in the seppuku ritual.
Kamajutsu: Use of the ﬂail in combat.
Kami: A nature spirit, revered by the Shinto religion. A kami can be anything that inspires awe 
and wonderment.
Kami-na-zuki: The Month of No Gods. A Shinto festival.
Kanji: The formal Japanese alphabet.
Kanko: Bureaucrats and servants of the government ministries.
Kanname-sai: A Shinto festival honouring Inari. Harvest Festival.
Kannushi: A Shinto priest.
Karma: Buddhist fortune and worth.
Kasa: A conical hat made of straw.
Kataginu: Court jacket or tabard.
Katakana: One of the Japanese alphabets.
Katana: Longsword.
Kempo: The headquarters or main temple, of a Buddhist sect.
Kenin: Lesser advisers, bureaucrats and servants to Buke families.
Kenjutsu: Swordsmanship.
Ki: Element of Wood. Also a reference to powers of supreme concentration.
Kimono: Everyday Japanese robes, worn wrapped around the body.
Kiri-sute-comen: Killing and Walking Away; the right of the samurai to kill disrespectful people 
of lower social standing.
Koku: Amount of rice needed to sustain a person for one year. Also refers to one gold coin.
Komoku: Buddhist guardian of the west. One of the Shi Daitenno.  
Kongo-Yasha: One of the protective Buddhas.
Kote: Armoured sleeve.
Kuge: Aristocracy.
Kuji-kuri: Ninja sign language.
Kukai: A Heian priest who developed the Shingon sect of Buddhism.
Kunai-sho: Minisry of the Imperial Household.
Kunitsu-Tsumi: A form of Shinto sin.
Kusanagi: One of the three heavenly treasures forming part of the Imperial Regalia. Kusanagi is 
a sword.
Kusarijutsu: Use of the two handed ﬂail in combat.
Kwaidan:  A ghost; an unquiet spirit.
Kyujutsu: Archey.
Kyushu: One of the four main Japanese islands.
Ma: A Horse.
Mabisashi: A helmet (kabuto) crest.
Magatama: One of the three heavenly treasures forming part of the Imperial Regalia. Magatama 
are the jewels.
Marishiten: Buddhist war goddess: the Divine Light.
Masakarijutsu: Use of the axe.
Matsuri: Name for any religious festival.
Mi: A serpent.
Minbu-sho: The Ministry of People Affairs.
Mizu: Element of Water.
Mon: Clan or family’s heraldic device. Also used as a term for a copper coin.
Myo-o: Collective name for the protective Buddhas.
Mzu: A year.
Naginata: Polearm.
Naginatajutsu: Use of the naginata or similar polearm.
Nakatsukasa-sho: Ministry of the Centre – legal clearing house.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

147

Nawanukejutsu: The art of escaping from bonds.
Ne: A rat.
Nekode: Hooked gloves used for climbing.
Nio: Guardian statue of a Buddhist temple gate.
Nusubito: A thief.
Obi: A belt or sash.
O-bon: Buddhist festival of the dead.
Okura-sho: The Treasury.
On: Personal honour.
Onojutsu: Use of the two handed axe (ono).
Pagoda: A tiered structure found in Buddhist temples.
Reijin: A male bard or entertainer.
Ryobu-Shinto: A mixture of the Buddhist and Shinto faiths.
Ryoko: Imperial Court bureaucrats.
Ryomin: Social caste – ‘Good Citizens’.
Ryoushi: A ﬁsherman.
Sadaijin: Minister of the Left.
-Sama: An honoriﬁc sufﬁx to a given name, implying great courtesy.
Samurai: The warrior caste of Japan. Samurai means ‘To Serve’.
San Senjin: Buddhist war gods.
-San: A honoriﬁc sufﬁx to a given name.
Sangaku shinko: ‘Mountain beliefs’ – the reverence for all Japanese mountains.
Saru: A monkey.
Senmin: Social caste – ‘Low Citizens’.
Sennin: Head of a ninja clan.
Sensei: A Teacher.
Seppuku: Ritual suicide.
Setsubun: A Shinto festival marking the end of winter.
Shaka: One of the contemplative Buddhas.
Shi Daitenno: The collective name for the Four Heavenly Kings of Buddhism.
Shikibu-sho: Ministry of Ceremony.
Shikoku: One of the four main Japanese islands.
Shikoro: A neckguard, attached to a kabuto.
Shingon: A particular sect of Buddhism.
Shoen: Ownership of land and property.
Shogaku: The art of calligraphy.
Shogun: Military dictator but also a term used for a General.
Shokunin: A craftsman or artisan.
So: A monk, typically Buddhist.
Sodegaramijutsu: Use of the Polearm; distinct from sojutsu.
Sohei: The warrior-monks of the Buddhist temples.
Sojutsu: Use of the spear (yari).
Suifu: A sailor – distinct from a ﬁsherman (Ryoushi).
Suitengu: A kami of the sea.
Suneate: Armoured shin guards.
Susano’o: Brother of Amaterasu, a Shinto deity.
Tachi: Longsword.
Taho: One of the contemplative Buddhas.
Tajikara-O: A Shinto deity.
Tamon: Buddhist guardian of the north. One of the Shi Daitenno. 
Tantojutsu: Use of the dagger.

148
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Tatsu: A dragon.
Teishin: A courtier, typically of noble birth.
Togi: An acrobat or entertainer.
Toki: One hour.
Tora: A tiger.
Tori: A cockerel.
Tori-oi: Falconry.
Tsuchi: Element of Earth.
Tsukimi: A Shinto festival.
Tsukuyomi: Brother of Amaterasu, a Shinto deity.
U: A hare.
Udaijin: Minister of the Right.
Ushi: An ox.
Wakazashi: Shortsword.
Watakushi: A barbed arrow – ‘bowelraker’.
Ya-awase: An arrow duel.
Yabusame: The art of archery from horseback.
Yakushi: One of the contemplative Buddhas.
Yamabushi: Adherents of the Shugendo sect of Buddhism; warrior monks.
Yata: One of the three heavenly treasures forming part of the Imperial Regalia. Yata is a mirror.
Yoroi: Samurai armour.
Youjutsusha: A sorcerer.
Zasu: Abbot of a Buddhist monastery or temple.
Zocho: Buddhist guardian of the south. One of the Shi Daitenno.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

149

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Legend & Open Content

Here at Mongoose Publishing, we want what we truly believe to be one of the best fantasy 
RPGs on the market to be easy to use and modify.  We have therefore made this rulebook 

Open Content, in conjunction with the Open Game Licence.  

All the text of this book is designated as Open Content – this means you are free to use 

the Open Game Licence (overleaf) to reproduce this text and build upon it with your own 
scenarios and mechanics. You can even print and sell such work, if that is your desire (and we 

would wish you the very best of luck if you choose to do this!).

By using the Open Content of this book, you also have permission to download the Legend 
Compatible logo from our web site (on the Legend product pages), and use that on any Leg-

end work you publish, to demonstrate your material is part of the wider Legend family.

Please note that the artwork in this book is not Open Content.

All books in the core Legend range (those whose titles have the word ‘Legend’ in them) will 
also be designated as Open Content, allowing you to expand your own games in many differ-

ent directions, while maintaining a solid root that everyone will be familiar with.

For example, you might be using Legend to produce your own gaming world. If you wanted 
to add some high seas action, you can simply and quickly bring over the Open Content rules 
we produce in, say, Pirates of Legend, knowing that everyone who plays Legend will at least 

be familiar with those rules.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

OPEN GAME LICENSE Version 1.0a 
The following text is the property of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. and is Copyright 2000 Wizards of the Coast, Inc 
(‘Wizards’). All Rights Reserved. 
1. Deﬁnitions: (a)’Contributors’ means the copyright and/or trademark owners who have contributed Open Game 
Content; (b)’Derivative Material’ means copyrighted material including derivative works and translations (including 
into other computer languages), potation, modiﬁcation, correction, addition, extension, upgrade, improvement, com-
pilation, abridgment or other form in which an existing work may be recast, transformed or adapted; (c) ‘Distribute’ 
means to reproduce, license, rent, lease, sell, broadcast, publicly display, transmit or otherwise distribute; (d)’Open 
Game Content’ means the game mechanic and includes the methods, procedures, processes and routines to the extent 
such content does not embody the Product Identity and is an enhancement over the prior art and any additional 
content clearly identiﬁed as Open Game Content by the Contributor, and means any work covered by this License, 
including translations and derivative works under copyright law, but speciﬁcally excludes Product Identity. (e) ‘Product 
Identity’ means product and product line names, logos and identifying marks including trade dress; artifacts; creatures 
characters; stories, storylines, plots, thematic elements, dialogue, incidents, language, artwork, symbols, designs, depic-
tions, likenesses, formats, poses, concepts, themes and graphic, photographic and other visual or audio representations; 
names and descriptions of characters, spells, enchantments, personalities, teams, personas, likenesses and special abili-
ties; places, locations, environments, creatures, equipment, magical or supernatural abilities or effects, logos, symbols, 
or graphic designs; and any other trademark or registered trademark clearly identiﬁed as Product identity by the owner 
of the Product Identity, and which speciﬁcally excludes the Open Game Content; (f) ‘Trademark’ means the logos, 
names, mark, sign, motto, designs that are used by a Contributor to identify itself or its products or the associated 
products contributed to the Open Game License by the Contributor (g) ‘Use’, ‘Used’ or ‘Using’ means to use, Distrib-
ute, copy, edit, format, modify, translate and otherwise create Derivative Material of Open Game Content. (h) ‘You’ or 
‘Your’ means the licensee in terms of this agreement. 
2. The License: This License applies to any Open Game Content that contains a notice indicating that the Open Game 
Content may only be Used under and in terms of this License. You must afﬁx such a notice to any Open Game Con-
tent that you Use. No terms may be added to or subtracted from this License except as described by the License itself. 
No other terms or conditions may be applied to any Open Game Content distributed using this License. 
3. Offer and Acceptance: By Using the Open Game Content You indicate Your acceptance of the terms of this License. 
4. Grant and Consideration: In consideration for agreeing to use this License, the Contributors grant You a perpetual, 
worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive license with the exact terms of this License to Use, the Open Game Content. 
5. Representation of Authority to Contribute: If You are contributing original material as Open Game Content, You 
represent that Your Contributions are Your original creation and/or You have sufﬁcient rights to grant the rights con-
veyed by this License. 
6. Notice of License Copyright: You must update the COPYRIGHT NOTICE portion of this License to include the 
exact text of the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any Open Game Content You are copying, modifying or distributing, 
and You must add the title, the copyright date, and the copyright holder’s name to the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any 
original Open Game Content you Distribute. 
7. Use of Product Identity: You agree not to Use any Product Identity, including as an indication as to compatibility, ex-
cept as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of each element of that Product Identity. 
You agree not to indicate compatibility or co-adaptability with any Trademark or Registered Trademark in conjunction 
with a work containing Open Game Content except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with 
the owner of such Trademark or Registered Trademark. The use of any Product Identity in Open Game Content does 
not constitute a challenge to the ownership of that Product Identity. The owner of any Product Identity used in Open 
Game Content shall retain all rights, title and interest in and to that Product Identity. 
8. Identiﬁcation: If you distribute Open Game Content You must clearly indicate which portions of the work that you 
are distributing are Open Game Content. 
9. Updating the License: Wizards or its designated Agents may publish updated versions of this License. You may use 
any authorised version of this License to copy, modify and distribute any Open Game Content originally distributed 
under any version of this License. 
10. Copy of this License: You MUST include a copy of this License with every copy of the Open Game Content You 
Distribute. 
11. Use of Contributor Credits: You may not market or advertise the Open Game Content using the name of any 
Contributor unless You have written permission from the Contributor to do so. 
12. Inability to Comply: If it is impossible for You to comply with any of the terms of this License with respect to some 
or all of the Open Game Content due to statute, judicial order, or governmental regulation then You may not Use any 
Open Game Material so affected. 
13. Termination: This License will terminate automatically if You fail to comply with all terms herein and fail to cure 
such breach within 30 days of becoming aware of the breach. All sublicenses shall survive the termination of this 
License. 
14. Reformation: If any provision of this License is held to be unenforceable, such provision shall be reformed only to 
the extent necessary to make it enforceable. 
15. COPYRIGHT NOTICE 
Open Game License v 1.0a Copyright 2000, Wizards of the Coast, Inc. 
Legend Core Rulebook, Copyright 2011, Mongoose Publishing Ltd
Samurai of Legend, Copyright 2012, Mongoose Publishing Ltd

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

