Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

arcania of
LEGEND

elementalism

Credits

Contents

Authors
Alejandro  Melchor,  Lawrence  Whittaker 
and Ian Sturrock

Introduction 

Developer
James M. Abbott

Editor
Matthew Sprange

Layout 
Will Chapman

Interior Illustrations 
Carlos Nunez de castro Torres, Ben 
Ellebracht, Jesus Garcia, JM Ringuet, 
Nick Egberts, Amanda Webb

Special Thanks
Ian Magee and Darren Wolfe

Elementalism: An Overview 

The Order of Elementalism 

Elemental Mastery 

Summoning Elementals 

The Elemental Courts 

Elemental Magic 

Elemental Lore 

Elemental Creatures 

2

5

12

18

28

42

50

58

64

Copyright Information

Arcania of Legend: Elementalism ©2014 Mongoose Publishing. All rights reserved. Reproduction of non-

Open Game Content of this work by any means without the written permission of the publisher is expressly 
forbidden. Legend is presented under the Open Game Licence. See page 104 for the text of this licence. All 
text paragraphs and tables containing game mechanics and statistics derivative of Open Game Content and 
the System Reference Document are considered to be Open Game Content.  All other significant characters, 

names, places, items, art and text herein are copyrighted by Mongoose Publishing.  All rights reserved.  

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Introduction

Common magical lore divides physical existence into four basic elements; Air, Earth, 
Fire, and Water. By manipulating these elements, Elementalists create some of the most 
spectacular effects of magic, raising walls of stone around themselves or raining fiery 
death upon their enemies. Unlike practitioners of common magic who barely touch 
the power of the elements and Priests whose powers come from the Gods, sorcerers 
master  the  raw  elemental  forces  without  permission  and,  most  of  the  time,  even 
without acknowledgement.

By  enhancing  a  sword  with  Fireblade  or  using  Breathe  Water,  all  magic  users  are 
elementalists  in  a  way. Their  knowledge,  however,  is  limited  to  the  strictly  defined 
spells they learn from their communities, churches and sorcerous orders. Beyond that 
basic knowledge, there are those who dare a greater understanding of the elements and 
walk the Four Elemental Ways gaining power over the building blocks of the universe.

The  Four  Elemental  Ways  is  a  collection  of  disciplines  that  enable  its  students  to 
understand, tap into, and bend the elements to their will. Initially they learn spells 
from  a  favoured  element  but  as  they  progress  through  the  Five  Circles  of  the  Way 
they increase their knowledge and abilities, learning the lore of additional elements. 
Eventually, they learn how to make the most of their control over elemental creatures 
and  their  expertise  soon  earns  them  the  attention  of  the  natives  and  rulers  of  the 
Elemental Planes. With time, they know the secrets of their chosen element so well 
that they can avoid its perils and can even travel and survive in the Elemental Planes. 
Such sorcerers earn the recognition and respect of the poorly known Elemental Courts 
and find themselves in the middle of their interplanar wars.

Any sorcerer can animate an element and any priest can summon elementals to serve 
him for a few moments, but the sorcerer who gains a greater control over the elements 
not only does it better, he truly understands the forces behind the spells and is capable 
of  feats  of  arcane  might  undreamt  of  by  the  uninitiated.  For  one  who  knowingly 
controls the primordial forces, there is little that can stop him.

2
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Arcania of Legend
Elementalism is the latest volume of the Arcania of Legend series, presenting a new 
way  of  looking  at  elementalism.  Designed  to  slot  seamlessly  into  any  fantasy-based 
Legend game, these sourcebooks enhance and expand the use of magic, adding a new 
dimension to campaigns. Each Arcania of Legend book is not intended just for Games 
Masters to use in conjunction with their non-player characters, players themselves will 
find full details on how to use the magic systems with new or existing characters, greatly 
increasing the wealth of options the core rulebooks present them with.

Elementalism: The Four Elemental Ways
The primary purpose of this sourcebook is to give players and Games Masters alike all 
the information they need to play with the primordial forces of the universe. Within 
these pages you will find chapters devoted to elementalism as a new order of sorcerous 
lore and new methods to control the elements of air, earth, fire, and water, both through 
the formulae of spells and by sheer force of will. The elementalists also have ways to 
summon, control, and make pacts with the powerful elementals, the embodiment of 
the raw forces of creation, and the intelligent and devious outsiders that make their 
homes in the Elemental Planes.

Any sorcerer worth his salt can command the elements to take shape through a simple 
spell, but the elementalist understands the true power that can be obtained from their 
manipulation, knowing full well that to limit his knowledge to a few paltry spells will 
keep him from realising the potential of tinkering with the four pillars of energy that 
give form and substance to the world.

If  not  for  the  shadows  their  mounts  projected  on  the  sand, Thalox  the  Red  would  have 
believed the caravan was travelling upon the surface of the sun and not the blasted terrain 
of the Broken Lands around Kahltur.

‘You are holding up very well for your first time in the Broken Lands.’ The caravan leader 
approached him in his latest inspection run. He was clad in the traditional garb of the 
desert people and regarded the sorcerer with a mocking grin that hesitated from becoming 
condescension.

‘Did you not hear the talk among the camel herders?’ Thalox grinned wickedly. ‘Why should 
I fear the desert when I have the blood of the efreet running through my veins?’

‘Hush!’ The nomad barked him silent, looking warily at the rest of his people. ‘Don’t speak so 
loud, fool! I agreed to let you come with us because you paid very well, but I will not hesitate 
to leave your flesh for the scorpions if you bring any kind of trouble.’

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

3

‘I shall remain silent,’ Thalox nodded gravely, but he was laughing in his head. His tanned 
white skin did not go well with his red hair and fiery amber eyes, a birthmark that pointed 
to the magic he had been able to command since a very young age. He was sent to the Order 
of Jhorkala to learn control of his power but had not been content until he stumbled upon 
the texts that spoke of the Four Elemental Ways, and then the fire in his blood had ignited 
… metaphorically speaking.

After the caravan leader left, he rummaged inside his desert tunic, taking good care that 
no one saw him. He produced a small box of finely wrought silver and blew gently over the 
diminutive lock. He heard the click and opened the lid cautiously. He felt the breeze caress 
his face.

‘We should be near the old temple ruins,’ the sorcerer whispered to the box. ‘Fly fast and 
sure, oh fairest of the fair, whose beauty is not matched in a thousand worlds and tell me 
what you find.’

‘Flattery … will … get you nowhere … my master …’ 

He heard the soft laughter in the wind, and a small gust blew his hood off, a last playful 
gesture from the sylph he had bound to the little box to do his bidding. 

The sun hid behind the far-off mountains and the caravan broke camp. It was definitely 
cooler during the night, but it was also extremely dangerous to travel in darkness in the 
Broken Lands. The sorcerer’s tent stood apart from the others, a small gesture from Thalox 
towards the superstitious teamsters who linked him to the terrible efreet. Perhaps they were 
not wrong.

He saw the flame from his candle tremble as if by a strong wind, even though the flaps of 
his tent were securely tied shut. He smiled as the sylph took her true form as the beautiful 
woman he had praised her to be. She sat cross-legged in front of him with the veils that 
comprised her only attire flitting around her, moved by her windy nature so as not to show 
any of her hidden female charms. She smiled back.

‘I have found it, master.’ Her voice was a whisper loud enough to hear without straining. ‘It 
stands no more than half a day of journey from here.’

‘Perfect, oh, loveliest among Zephyr’s daughters.’ Thalox did not tire of complimenting the 
sylph. Her kind had a weakness for pretty language, and he was not lying in any case. ‘I shall 
inform our guide that we do not need his services anymore.’

‘Would you travel at night, master?’

‘I am a flesh-bound son of Fire, as you are an ephemeral daughter of Wind,’ he smiled gently. 
‘Not the desert, the ruins, nor the City of Brass that lies beyond them holds danger for a 
mage of the Way of Burning Hearts. No danger, but great power awaits us, my pretty one …’

4
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Elementalism: An Overview

The Material Plane is a collection of matter scattered around with no apparent order or 
reason. Since the beginnings of arcane study, sorcerers have sought ways to understand 
and control the world around them. As part of those studies, they discovered the power 
and influence of the four elements; Air, Earth, Fire, and Water.

Most of early arcane magic evolved from the manipulation of the four elements in one 
form or another and slowly grew to encompass the less definable aspects of Creation. 
There are many remnants of elemental magic in numerous grimoires, both known and 
those lost to time in dusty tombs, that only the most foolish and ignorant dismiss the 
importance of the Four Elements in arcane praxis.

As important as elemental magic is in arcane lore, there are few to no sorcerers who 
call themselves ‘elementalists.’ Even among those few, the majority are merely normal 
sorcerers who make a point of learning spells with elemental effects. They have not 
dedicated  their  whole  lives  to  the  understanding  of  the  elements,  standing  at  the 
crossroads of the Four Elemental Ways but committing to none of them.

The Order of the Four Elemental Ways
Called the Order of Elementalism or just Elementalist Order, this discipline grew at 
the  same  time  as  many  other  sorcerous  orders  but  quickly  fell  out  of  favour  as  the 
other orders provided a slightly safer and quicker route to power. It was certainly not 
forgotten.

The sorcerers who kept Elementalism alive claim that their bloodlines called them to 
practice  this  art;  believing  themselves  descendants  of  dragons,  elementals  and  other 
creatures  not  native  to  the  material  plane.  Whether  this  is  true  or  not  is  yet  to  be 
discovered, however, there are sorcerers who have an affinity for the elements and they 
have done their utmost to make this order prosper and survive.

Elementalism  divides  into  two  disciplines  that  cross  and  apply  to  the  Four  Ways, 
with no restriction as to who can learn what. The first, elemental mastery is what the 
orders earliest sorcerers excelled at and used to keep the school alive. The discipline 
concentrates on manipulating the raw essence of the elements to bend their energy to 
the sorcerers will. Elemental masters are more famous for being able to produce their 
elements of preference out of thin air, than for their control of existing amounts of it.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

5

6Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Elemental Summoning is the second discipline and was originally a gift from the Gods. 
Some priests, particularly those who worship nature deities and Gods with a close tie 
to a particular element, the Thunderer for example, still can and often do, summon 
base elementals. Summoners study the lore of the Elemental Planes more extensively 
than other sorcerers, and they learn of rituals and additional formulae that allow them 
to summon the higher elementals as well as more powerful elemental creatures and, 
with some time and risk, elemental rulers. They also create the wondrous Receptacles, 
magical items that bind or imprison elementals so that they remain always at hand, 
answering to the owners’ wishes at any time.

The Four Elemental Ways
The elementalist disciplines are open to any sorcerer, even to the non-elementalist who 
stumbles upon them, although the students of the Four Elemental Ways will always 
have an advantage because of their developed affinity to the elements.

A devoted student of the Elementalist Order chooses one of the Four Elemental Ways; 
Air,  Earth,  Fire,  or  Water.  Once  he  starts  learning  the  secrets  of  that  first  element, 
he is forever barred from learning the abilities of its opposite, but may later choose 
to  thread  a  secondary  and  even  a  third  Way  from  the  remaining  elements.  The 
elementalist becomes familiar with the characteristics of his chosen element, which not 
only includes its physical manifestation but also its philosophical correspondence, its 
Elemental Plane, and the creatures and elementals aligned with it.

Air—the Seeker of Secrets
Students of the Way of Air are the most interested in learning for its own sake. Curious 
and persistent, their peers consider them flighty because they shift from one subject of 
study to the next, apparently leaving things unfinished. What they do is try to keep the 
big picture in sight, always remembering where they left off any of their studies and 
ready to pick it up again. The Way of Air values honesty and wit and loathes stagnation.

Earth—Unflinching Stability
Those  who  travel  the  Way  of  Earth  are  constant  and  dogged  in  their  pursuit. The 
polar opposite of Air, they pursue a task until its completion and are the worst kind of 
perfectionists. They are reliable but sometimes stubborn, speaking with brutal honesty 
and  always  to  the  point. The  Way  of  Earth  values  patience  and  responsibility  and 
loathes slackers.

Fire—the Cleansing Change
Shifting and energetic, students of the Way of Fire are powder kegs ready to detonate. 
Whatever they undertake, they do so with utmost enthusiasm and devoting all their 
strength. Their demeanour can be exhausting to others, and the Fire followers are said 
to devour everything they come in contact with. One sure thing is that whatever they 
touch  with  powers  or  personality  never  remains  the  same. The  Way  of  Fire  values 
energy and drive and loathes passivity.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

7

Water—Source of All Life
Serene is the keyword to describe the adherents of the Way of Water. They seek the 
deeper  wisdoms  of  the  world  and  take  the  time  to  learn  them. They  are  nurturing 
and many care for the safety of others, although they are not strangers to duplicity, 
always hiding something beneath the surface. Students of Water adapt easily to any 
circumstance,  flowing  around  their  problems  with  ease.  The  Way  of  Water  values 
wisdom and adaptability and loathes recklessness.

The  Four  Elemental  Ways  are  general  directions  of  study,  not  narrow  areas  of 
knowledge.  An  elementalist  can  practice  the  disciplines  of  elemental  mastery  and 
elemental summoning as he sees fit without losing his ability to practice either in light 
of his preference. Any sorcerer can dabble in any of the methods from the elemental 
disciplines, but he lacks the expertise of a true elementalist and has no access to the 
more refined and advanced techniques and power.

The Elements
The foundations of elemental studies are the elements themselves. Elementalists probe 
them, work and experiment with them, sometimes with disastrous results. According 
to the earliest texts, the raw elements compose all the energy and matter in existence, 
distilled  in  many  forms  and  combinations.  Based  on  this  assumption,  students  of 
the Four Ways look for the element’s correspondence with everything. Most matter 
corresponds with earth and water as energy relates to air and fire, but no classification 
is absolute and contradictions exist, such as acid (the water that burns).

Elementalists appear to be engaged in a race of sorts, trying to relate materials, energy, 
and effects to their elements and thus gain power and influence thanks to their studies. 
Material  correspondences  are  more  useful  to  alchemists  and  summoners,  for  they 
extract  the  essence  of  the  ingredients  to  achieve  their  respective  results  of  creating 
substances like alchemist’s fire and summoning specific elemental powers such as the 
royal salamanders. Many an elementalist will carry a gem or precious stone that relates 
to his element, not only for luck but also for the focus of his magic.

By calling on the properties of an element, a student of the Four Ways may also influence 
related phenomena, as adepts of Air and Fire are able to affect lightning, and adepts 
of  Earth  and Water  to  affect  quicksand  and  the  like. These  subtle  correspondences 
take more time to develop but greatly increase the elementalist’s array of powers and 
augmented magic.

The  most  powerful  students  of  the  Elementalist  School  learn  to  apply  an  element’s 
higher correspondences, the philosophical foundations of each element. This higher 
knowledge is much harder to come by, and only constant study and practice can help 
a  sorcerer attain it, for it expands his area of influence to its utmost reach. Among 
the higher correspondences are Air’s relationship with mind-affecting magic and Fire’s 
aspects of change.

8
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

The Four Elemental Planes
A sorcerer’s studies of the elements will bring him in contact with the Elemental Planes 
sooner rather than later. The first and most easily understood manipulation of these 
planes is the summoning of an elemental creature via summoning magic. The sorcerer 
calls forth a simple elemental for a brief time, and the experience helps him learn some 
details of what life on an Elemental Plane can be like. Dedication and discipline will 
broaden the student’s understanding, and progress in the Order will allow him to tap 
into these planes, letting him draw elemental material from them to achieve the effects 
elementalists are famous for. Eventually, he can willingly open temporal vortices and 
gates to an Elemental Plane.

The vortices an elementalist creates are small pricks in the fabric of the Material Plane 
that connect directly to the Elemental Plane of the sorcerer’s choice, and elemental 
material spouts with varying intensity as desired by the elementalist. Other sorcerers 
scoff at this method, calling it crude and uncontrolled, but elementalists can and do 
control the material they bring from other planes.

The  Four  Elemental  Planes  are  quite  hostile  to  life,  as  it  is  known  on  the  Material 
Plane, with Air being the most benign and Fire most hazardous. The planes do not 
need an elementalist to connect them to the Material Plane as natural vortices occur in 
extreme locations such as active volcanoes, deep-sea trenches, the world’s core, and at 
great altitudes, each for a corresponding element.

The Order of the Four Elemental Ways claims that the world was created as the gods 
opened the gates of each Elemental Plane and then stirred the pouring material, mixing 
and shaping it until everything was given structure, form and substance.

Elemental Beings
All  sorcerers  and  some  priests  are  aware  of  the  existence  of  elementals,  but  they 
are  familiar  only  with  the  barely  sentient  clumps  of  material  that  answer  to  simple 
summoning or animation magic. Elementalists who delve more deeply into their craft 
know better. They know that the Elemental Planes are inhabited by a surprisingly wide 
variety of creatures, with elementals being the most base.

Elementals and Elemental Creatures
Elementals are the basest denizens of the Elemental Planes, being animated quantities 
of material that can be born and come undone randomly, their consciousness’s small 
shards of the plane’s power. An elemental bears no ill to a summoning sorcerer once it 
returns home, as it probably did not exist prior to the summoning and is not likely to 
survive as an individual for much more time either.

The larger elementals are the ones that have endured for one reason or another, amassing 
more of the elemental material around their consciousness shards. An elemental slain 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

9

in the Material Plane will reform in its home plane none the worse for wear, but if 
destroyed in his native plane the consciousness shard re-joins the rolling material of the 
plane, to regenerate anew somewhere else as a lesser elemental.

Elemental creatures are a bit more complex, taking the shapes of creatures that exist on 
the Material Plane and having an ecology of sorts. As with elementals, they possess a 
consciousness shard that gathers elemental material to give it its shape, but their shards 
are different. While elementals are primitive brutes, elemental creatures are the animals 
and beasts that comprise the plane’s fauna.

The  scholars  of  the  Elementalist  Order  have  concluded  that  the  natural  cycle  of 
predator and prey that exists between elemental creatures is based on the devouring of 
the consciousness shards, which the elemental creatures need to sustain their forms in 
the dynamic flow of their home’s material. This would explain why they would attack 
planar travellers, as it is not their bodies that they seek to consume, which provide no 
nourishment to them, but the spark of consciousness and intelligence.

Higher Elementals and the Courts
Unbeknownst  to  all  but  the  most  learned  scholars  of  the  traditionalist  orders  and 
intermediate students of the Four Elemental Ways, there are more kinds of elementals. 
The  ones  more  frequently  met  are  the  danbach  and  the  stopar  (see  the  Creatures 
section for details), who have a much greater intelligence than base elementals. These 
higher elementals possess a society that nearly none is privy to, and they certainly have 
more company.

Higher  elemental  creatures  have  the  strongest  consciousness  shards  and  do  not 
relinquish them lightly, living existences as fully sentient individuals. The most typical 
higher elementals include the sylphs from the Plane of Air, the undines from the Plane 
of Water, the royal salamanders from the Plane of Fire (not to be confused with the 
salamander outsiders), and the gnomides from the Plane of Earth. They are to their 
native planes what humanoid races are to the Material Plane: the citizens, workers, 
warriors, adventurers, and rulers of their domains.

The higher elementals are organised in courts, and there exist several of these as there 
are many humanoid kingdoms, but in general they are called the Elemental Courts. 
The higher elementals group in hierarchies that have more to do with castes than with 
actual power. The most powerful stopar still has to bow before a common sylph. It 
is very hard to summon these elementals, and it is usually the domain of dedicated 
elementalists who still must bargain for favours instead of just giving orders.

10
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Above all the higher elementals are the elemental rulers, demigods in their own right 
who wield great power and have dominion over their elements and the corresponding 
planes.  The  elemental  rulers  even  have  priests  among  both  elemental  natives  and 
creatures of the Material Plane, although their cults are small compared to others for 
the true gods.

Affiliated Creatures
Extra planar creatures make up the next order of elemental denizens, powerful creatures 
that have made the Elemental Planes their homes. There are also creatures that, even 
if  their  home  is  definitely  the  Material  Plane,  are  closely  aligned  with  the  elements 
enough to be affected by the elementalist’s power: giants, basilisks, hydras, gargoyles, 
and, marginally, even dragons.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

11

The Order of Elementalism

Advancement  in  the  Elementalist  Order  grants  sorcerers  a  much  greater  depth  of 
knowledge  and  understanding  regarding  the  elements,  allowing  them  to  master 
multiple grimoires and summon, and possibly bind, elementals of much higher caste 
than is possible for priests using the Summon Elemental spell from Legend. 

Studying the ways of the elements requires discipline and dedication. A sorcerer must 
be willing to devote a significant amount of time and effort, not to mention coin, to 
further his knowledge of the Four Elemental Ways. For the students of the Four Ways, 
the price is more than worth it – membership has its benefits.

The Four Elemental Ways
Whether a novice character or an experienced one, the Order of the Four Elemental 
Ways is open to all sorcerers, provided they meet the strict entry requirements and pay 
the requisite entry fee, with a desire to study, manipulate and control the elements. 
Upon  commencing  his  studies  in  the  Elementalist  Order,  the  sorcerer,  regardless 
of  experience,  must  choose  one  of  the  Four  Way;:  Air,  Earth,  Fire,  or  Water. This 
decision will forever define the elementalist’s access to elemental magic and elemental 
relationships. The first element he chooses becomes his Primary Way; if he later learns 
the abilities for a second or even a third element, he is always known as an elementalist 
of that Way. For example, a sorcerer who begins studying the Way of Air and, after 
reaching its higher levels of power, complements his knowledge by studying the Way of 
Fire; is still known as an air elementalist.

Magic
Each way teaches a specific selection of common magic spells and its own grimoire, 
focusing  on  the  spells  directly  associated  with  the  element  concerned.  As  sorcerers 
advance  through  the  ranks  of  the  Order,  they  not  only  learn  additional  grimoires 
of complimentary elements, Air, Fire and Water for example, they also learn how to 
combine elements creating more powerful spells. The below are general requirements 
and benefits for each rank attained and applied to all of the Elemental Ways.

12
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Divine Elementalists
In settings where the elemental rulers are worshipped as Gods or Demi-Gods 
it may be appropriate for priests to have access to the teachings of the Order 
along with their regular divine spells. Two suggestions for implementing this 
are;

1)  Initiates are taught the appropriate Sorcery (Grimoire) and Manipulation 
skills at their base value (at character creation they may only be bought 
as  advanced  skills  and  cannot  be  increased  with  ‘free’  skill  points)  and 
may  progress  as  normal  in  the  order,  studying  both  forms  of  magic 
simultaneously.

2)  The Order is divine in nature and substitutes Pact (Elemental Ruler) and 
Lore  (Theology)  for  Sorcery  (Grimoire)  and  Manipulation  respectively, 
however, priests may only ever know a number of divine spells equal to 
their initial dedicated POW.

Membership
Novice, 1st Circle
Novices provide all the Orders menial labour, cleaning, mending and so on in exchange 
for preliminary training in five of the orders skills.

Apprentices, 2nd Circle
Must have five of the orders skills at their base value. Beginning sorcerers pay a tuition 
fee of 1,100 Silver Pieces; this covers their training costs for their Primary Way, which 
they  now  choose,  including  their  Sorcery  (Grimoire),  Manipulation  and  Common 
Magic  skills.  Experienced  sorcerers  pay  600  Silver  Pieces  and  choose  their  Primary 
Way as above. They receive their Sorcery (Grimoire) skill at its base percentage and are 
taught the Ways Common Magic skills. 

Adepts, 3rd Circle
Adepts must have five of the orders skills at 50% or greater. On payment of an annual 
fee  of  150  SP,  an  Adept  receives  all  future  training  in  the  Orders  skills  and  magic 
free of charge. They gain a Secondary Way Grimoire at its base percentage, subject to 
undertaking the appropriate time of study as per the rules for acquiring sorcery in the 
Legend Core Rulebook. Additionally, adepts choose one of two disciplines, Elemental 
Mastery which teaches raw elemental control, or Elemental Summoning. They gain 
either of these advanced skills at their base value.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

13

Mage, 4th Circle
Magi of the Order must have five of the orders skill at 75% or greater. They gain a 
Tertiary Way Grimoire to its base percentage subject to undertaking the appropriate 
time of study as per the rules for acquiring sorcery in the Legend Core Rulebook. Mages 
learn the spell Elemental Portal and are able to choose one of the orders Heroic Abilities. 
They can, if they choose, begin instruction in the other discipline, Elemental Mastery 
or Elemental Summoning.

Archmage, 5th Circle
Candidates must have been a Mage of the order for at least three years and must have 
at least five cult skills of at least 90% and have either Elemental Mastery or Elemental 
Summoning  at  50%  or  greater.  They  have  access  to  the  orders  remaining  Heroic 
Abilities.

Order Skills:
Bind (Elemental)*, Courtesy, Culture (Primary Way elementals), Elemental Mastery*, 
Influence, Language (Primary Way Elementals), Lore (Elements), Lore (The Planes), 
Persistence, Summon (Elemental)*, Swim
* New Skills see the Elemental Mastery and Summoning chapters. 

Heroic Abilities
Elemental Immunity (see below), Elemental Mastery Techniques – see the Elemental 
mastery chapter for details, Linguist, Loremaster

Elemental Immunity
Requirements: CON 15 or higher, either Elemental Mastery or Elemental Summoning 
at 90% or higher
Hero Points: 10
Duration: A number of minutes equal to CON x 10

There are four versions of this ability, Air, Water, Earth and Fire (if using the Chinese 
Elementals presented later in this book there are five, substitute Metal and Wood for 
Air). For the duration of this ability you are immune to any damage, magical or non-
magical,  from  that  element.  You  ignore  the  hazards  of  the  chosen  elements  plane; 
however, humanoids travelling to the plane of water for example, would still need to 
cast Breathe Water or Abjure (Air).

Opposing Elements
The elements, as well as their Elemental Planes, are arranged in a circle where one of 
them opposes another. When a character chooses one of the Four Ways as his Primary 
Way, he can never learn the abilities of its opposing Way and cannot learn any of its 
correspondent spells.

14
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

15

EARTH

W

AIR

N

S

WATER

E

FIRE

An elementalist with Fire as his primary Way can never learn the abilities of the Way 
of Water, nor learn any of the spells from that Ways grimoire (see below) or opposed 
Common Magic spells. For example an Elementalist of The Way of Fire would be able 
to cast Dragons Breath, Firearrow, Fireblade, Ignite and Light but be unable to cast 
Chill, Frostbite and Water Breath.

16
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

The Way of Whispering Winds (Air)
Common  Magic:  Countermagic,  Countermagic  Shield,  Detect  (Elemental  Type), 
Protection, Second Sight, Skybolt, Speedart

Grimoire: Abjure (Air), Animate (Air), Banish (Earth Elemental), Cyclone*, Diminish 
(INT),  Dominate  (Air  Elemental),  Elemental  Portal  (Air)*,  Enhance  (INT),  Fly, 
Neutralise Magic, Protective Ward, Smother, Telepathy, Wind Slam

The Way of Burning Hearts (Fire)
Common  Magic:  Armoursmith’s  Boon,  Cauterise,  Countermagic,  Countermagic 
Shield, Detect (Elemental Type), Dragon’s Breath, Extinguish, Fire Arrow, Fireblade, 
Ignite, Light, Protection, Second Sight, Skybolt, Speedart, Warmth

Grimoire:  Abjure  (Water),  Animate  (Fire),  Banish  (Water  Elemental),  Damage 
Enhancement, Diminish (POW), Dominate (Fire Elemental), Elemental Portal (Fire)*, 
Enhance (POW), Flame Bolt*, Firestorm*, Glow, Immolate*

The Way of Immovable Mountains (Earth)
Common  Magic:  Armoursmith’s  Boon,  Bludgeon,  Countermagic,  Countermagic 
Shield, Detect (Elemental Type), Mason’s Boon, Protection, Second Sight

Grimoire:  Animate  (Earth),  Banish  (Air  Elemental),  Crush*,  Diminish  (STR), 
Dominate  (Earth  Elemental),  Earthquake*,  Elemental  Portal  (Earth)*,  Enhance 
(STR), Form/Set (Earth).

The Way of Flowing Rivers (Water)
Common  Magic:  Chill,  Countermagic,  Countermagic  Shield,  Detect  (Elemental 
Type), Frostbite, Water Breath

Grimoire:  Abjure  (Water),  Animate  (Water),  Banish  (Fire  Elemental),  Damage 
Resistance,  Diminish  (CON),  Dominate  (Water  Elemental),  Desiccate*,  Drown*, 
Enhance (CON), Elemental Portal (Water)*, Form/Set (Water), Whirlpool*

*New spells - see the Elemental Magic chapter.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

17

Elemental Mastery

Elemental Mastery (INT+POW)
As  sorcerers  become  more  experienced  with  their  chosen  element  they  are  able  to 
manipulate the elements directly without using spells as a crutch. Regular sorcerers 
can attempt the most basic techniques of elemental control, but lack the knowledge 
and skill to do so effectively. Dedicated students of the Elementalist Order are more 
proficient  in  handling  elemental  forces  and  can  achieve  much  greater  results  with 
considerably less effort.

Only  direct  elemental  effects  can  be  attempted,  which  means  that  the  sorcerer  can 
control  or  create  only  air,  earth,  fire,  and  water,  not  acid,  cold,  electricity,  or  sonic 
effects. To manipulate an amount of an existing element costs only the base Magic 
Points,  to  create  the  element  from  nothing  costs  an  additional  two  Magic  Points. 
Mastery effects can be used against elementals and elemental creatures, with varying 
consequences defined in each description.

To use the Elemental Mastery skill, sorcerers follow the procedures below and then roll 
against their skill.

•	 A Critical results in the Magic Point cost being reduced to the base cost of the 

technique regardless of the number of parameters increased.

•	 A Success results in the effect manifesting at the beginning of the sorcerers 1st turn 

in the next round.

•	 A Failure results in the effect not manifesting. The Magic Points used to create it 

are lost.

•	 A Fumble results in the loss of the Magic Points used to create it and the sorcerer 

must succeed on a Difficult (-20%) Persistence test or gain two levels of Fatigue.

Elemental Mastery Effects
Elementalists  can  attempt  to  exert  raw  control  over  only  those  elements  in  which 
they  are  knowledgeable,  meaning  the  Elemental  Ways  for  which  they  have  learned 
the appropriate grimoire. The effects accomplished with elemental mastery techniques 
are always spectacular and incapable of fine manipulation. The process for elemental 
mastery is as follows.

18
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

• Define the technique and its parameters.
• Calculate the Magic Point cost.
• Spend a full rounds worth of Combat Actions
• Unleash the technique’s effect.

Types of Techniques
Raw manipulation is limited only by the sorcerer’s imagination … and his Magic Point 
reservoirs. The following are the most typical techniques an elementalist can attempt 
when manipulating an element, but players and Games Masters are encouraged to come 
up with new ones. Each technique carries a base cost in Magic Points that provides a 
basic set of parameters, which can be increased by spending additional Magic Points 
in a similar fashion to applying manipulations to sorcery spells. Base costs, parameters, 
and specific effects for each element are detailed later in this chapter.

Elemental  Propulsion: The  raw  power  of  the  sorcerer’s  will  allows  him  to  use  an 
element as a means of transport and/or propulsion for another transport.

Imprison/Barrier: The character moves the element in such a way that it immobilises 
another creature or erects a protective barrier around himself and others.

Increase/Decrease  Element:  This  technique  takes  an  element  and  increases  or 
decreases its volume and mass. If no amount of the element is present, this technique 
creates the amount in the technique’s basic parameters as a conjuration effect.

Move Element: The character can shift around the position of a basic volume of the 
element. This includes the mythical parting of the waters.

Project Element: This allows the sorcerer to push a certain amount of the element at 
great speeds in order to cause damage.

Technique Parameters
Paying the base cost of a technique enacts it with at a minimum set of parameters, 
which the character can increase at additional cost. Spending a single point increases 
the parameter by the listed amount. The only limit to the number of Magic Points that 
can be spent to increase a single parameter is the number of Magic Points the sorcerer 
has available. Most of the parameters resemble those of a spell, with some differences.

Effect Magnitude: For purposes of resistances, a technique counts as a spell with a 
magnitude equal to its total Magic Point cost halved.

Casting Time: Elemental mastery effects take all of the casters concentration for the 
entire round. The caster can move at walking pace and take only minor and defensive 
actions, which are Difficult (-20%). Sustaining any damage requires a hard Persistence 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

19

(-40%)  check.  If  the  Persistence  check  is  a  critical  success,  the  Magic  Point  cost  is 
halved,  a  failure  results  in  the  technique  failing  and  the  loss  of  the  required  Magic 
Points,  a  fumble  leaves  the  caster  dazed  for  1D3  Combat  Actions. The  techniques 
effect occurs at the beginning of the casters initiative in the next round.

Range:  Almost  all  of  the  techniques  work  at  a  range  of  POW  in  metres;  spending 
additional Magic Points can increase this as described under each technique.

Target/Area: Exactly as a spell, a technique can be made to target one or more creatures 
or an area, and so on. Techniques with a personal range affect an emanation around 
the sorcerer.

Duration:  Each  description  lists  the  technique’s  duration  at  the  base  cost  only. 
Instantaneous techniques cannot have their duration increased.

Amounts: This defines any quantitative parameter, such as volume and mass, or dies 
of damage.

Resist: The resistance, if any, is listed in the techniques description.

Paying the Cost
Once the sorcerer decides which parameters he wishes to increase, and by how much, 
he adds this cost to the technique’s base cost.

Elemental Mastery Techniques
Elemental Propulsion
Base Cost: 3 Magic Points

Parameter
Range
Target

Duration

Amounts
Resist

Base
POW x 2 metres
Number of creatures and objects inside a 6 
metre radius area equal to 1/4 POW 
10 minutes/10% or part thereof of Elemental 
Control skill
Speed 20 metres/round
None

Increase per point
POW in metres
1 creature or object.

10 minutes

+6 metres/round

Air: As many creatures as 1/4 of your POW (rounded up), including you, are hoisted 
up by a small, harmless hurricane. You rise to a maximum height equal to 3 metres per 
10% or part thereof of Sorcery (Whispering Winds) and move at a base speed of 20 
metres per round. As an option, the caster can make the wind blow to propel a sailed 
vehicle at its normal speed.

20
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Earth: The ground shifts beneath the character and any other creatures he wants to 
move, transporting them without effort for the duration of the technique. The moving 
earth  transports  characters  up  walls  and  ceilings  as  if  they  were  the  normal  ‘down’ 
direction, but any object that leaves the elementalist’s surroundings drops normally. 
For an additional Magic Point, the character can travel through solid earth and stone, 
much like a gnome.

Fire: Flickering tongues of fire surround the subjects of this technique. They move from 
one piece of flammable material to another, leaving a thin trail of flames in their wake.

Water: The character and other subjects of the technique move on or under the surface 
of  water  at  the  listed  speed. The  technique  creates  a  bubble  around  the  characters 
and  objects  moving  underwater,  but  the  air  inside  lasts  only  1  minute  per  10%  of 
the Sorcery (Flowing Rivers) grimoire and must be replenished, unless of course, the 
sorcerer has also cast Abjure (Air).

Effect on Elementals: The character can inflict 4d6 points of damage to a random 
location by passing through an elemental using this technique.

Imprison/Barrier
Base Cost: 3 points

Parameter
Range
Target

Duration
Amounts
Resist

Base
POW in metres
A target of up to three points of SIZ for every 
10% of Elemental Control skill.
1 round/10% of Elemental Control skill. 1 round per Magic Point
POW x 5%
Evade

Increase per point
1/2 POW in metres
1 additional point of SIZ 
per 10% 

+10%
Cumulative -10% penalty

Air: Swirling wind grapples the target and holds him still a few inches above the ground. 
The target can only take actions not requiring movement, and any sorcerer must succeed 
in an opposed Persistence versus Sorcery (Whispering Winds) test in order to cast a spell. 
He can break free of the wind with an opposed Brawn test, the wind bindings have a base 
Brawn skill of the casters POW x 5%. However, the air makes a new attempt to grapple 
the target every round, allowing new Evade rolls. If used as a barrier, it is considered a 
strong wind and ranged attacks suffer a -50% penalty.

Earth: The ground and walls buckle and weave, shooting forward to grab the target. 
The  target and the rocky bands make opposed Brawn checks, with the earth effect 
having a base Brawn skill of the casters POW x 5%. As a barrier, a sturdy sheet of rock 
rises or appears between the caster and a source of attack. It provides total cover, is 
Size, Huge and has one Armour Point per 10% of the sorcerers Sorcery (Immovable 
Mountain) grimoire skill.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

21

Fire: Columns of flame shoot upwards and around the target, dancing wildly but not 
touching it. If the target tries to escape, he suffers an automatic amount of fire damage 
to an appropriate location according to the elementalists Sorcery (Burning Heart) skill: 
1–20% 1D2 damage, 21–40% 1D4, 41–60% 1D6, 61–80% 1D8, 81–100% 1D10, 
101–120%  2D6,  121–140%  1D6+1D8,  141–160%  2D8  and  so  on.  The  flames 
follow the target, who must make a new opposed Evade roll every round the flames try 
to surround him. As a barrier, the flames render ranged attacks impossible and make 
close combat attacks Hard (-40% penalty).

Water: The water version of this technique works best when underwater or near a body 
of water. A large, rolling mass of water surrounds the target. Trying to cross it inflicts 
automatic  damage  to  the  offending  location  according  to  the  elementalists  Sorcery 
(Flowing Rivers) skill: 1–20% 1D2 damage, 21–40% 1D4, 41–60% 1D6, 61–80% 
1D8, 81–100% 1D10, 101–120% 2D6, 121–140% 1D6+1D8, 141–160% 2D8 and 
so on. The target must also succeed on an Evade test. If he fails, the water tosses him 
back inside. As a barrier, the swirling mass provides total cover as the earth version 
above; the penalty to attacks also applies to melee attack rolls. For an extra Magic Point, 
this technique can create bindings or barriers made of ice, with the same effect as the 
earth version.

Effect on Elementals: Normal, but all Evade checks are Very Hard (-60%) if they are 
from an opposite element to the elemental.

Increase/Decrease Element
Base Cost: 1 point

Parameter
Range
Area

Duration
Amounts
Resist

Base
POW in metres
1 cubic metre per 10% of 
Elemental Control skill.
Permanent
Fills the area
Evade

Increase per Point
1/2 POW in metres
1 cubic metre 

n/a
n/a
Cumulative -10% penalty

Air: Creates enough breathable air for one person for 10 minutes for every cubic metre 
in the technique’s area. This technique is much too slow to produce a sudden vacuum 
when reducing the air, but it may keep air from an area, with all breathing creatures 
inside suffering the effects of suffocation.

Earth: The amount of soil or stone can impede creatures in the area forcing them to 
make Hard (-40%) Evade or Acrobatics checks to maintain balance if moving at full 
speed.  If  moving  at  half  speed  the  Evade  test  becomes  Difficult  (-20%),  moving  at 
quarter speed makes the Evade test routine. Decreasing the amount can be used to dig 
by removing the material in the area to a depth of 2 metres.

22
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Fire: The  conflagration  is  a  normal  fire  that  deals  1d6  points  of  fire  damage  to  all 
locations to anyone who spends a round inside the area. All flammable materials burn 
normally unless the fire is quenched by normal or magical means. When reducing the 
amount, the fire in the affected area dies down instantly.

Water: Creates, or reduces the amount of water by, 1000 litres per cubic metre of area.

Effect  on  Elementals:  If  increasing  the  amount,  the  effect  acts  as  a  Haste  spell  or 
conversely, a Hinder spell when decreasing it.

Move Element
Base Cost: 2 points

Parameter
Range
Area
Duration

Amounts
Resist

Base
POW in metres
10 metre x 10 metre*
1  round/10%  of  Elemental 
Control skill.
All inside the area
Evade

Increase per Point
1/2 POW in metres
2 metres x 2 metres
1 round

n/a
Cumulative -10% penalty

*The affected area can be shaped at will.

Air: Creates soft breezes of less than 30 kph. It is enough to clear smoke and push 
gases and vapours towards a different direction than their normal spread, but does not 
impede movement for flying creatures. It can keep in check a vampire in mist form or 
other creatures with similar abilities.

Earth: A more effective but expensive way to dig, this acts as increase/decrease element 
in terms of area and volume. The material can be used to make platforms or palisades, 
as it is the only element that maintains the position at which the caster leaves it with 
this technique.

Fire: Creates a clear path across a patch of flames, on which creatures suffer no damage. 
If the fire is pushed so that it touches flammable objects, they start burning even when 
the fire returns to its original position after the technique ends.

Water: Keeps an area of height/depth of 3 metres empty of water. It can be used to 
cross-rivers and other bodies of water. It also works with pools of fairly liquid materials 
like acid and poison.

Effect on Elementals: Paralyses the elemental for the duration unless it succeeds on an 
opposed test of Resilience against the sorcerer’s Sorcery (Grimoire) skill.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

23

Project Element
Base Cost: 3 points

Parameter
Range
Target
Duration
Amounts

Resist

Base
POW x 5 Metres
1 creature
Instantaneous
1d4 damage per 20% of 
Elemental Control skill to a 
random location. 
Evade**

Increase per point
POW in metres
1 creature*
n/a
Increase damage die by one step; 
i.e. 1 point = 1d6, 2 points = 1d8 
and so forth
Cumulative -10% penalty

*Targets cannot be more than 10 metres apart from each other.
** A Critical Evade negates all damage, Successful Evade halves damage, a Failed Evade 
results in full damage and a Fumbled Evade results in the target being subjected to the 
Combat Manoeuvre listed in the elements description.

Air:  Pushes  air  into  razor-sharp  gusts  that  act  as  cutting  weapons.  Deals  double 
damage against creatures in mist form or with similar abilities. Armour reduces damage 
normally. Combat Manoeuvre, Bleed.

Earth:  Creates  or  shoots  shards  of  stone  that  act  as  thrusting  weapons.  Combat 
Manoeuvre, Impale

Fire: Creates lancets of flames (or shoots them from a nearby fire source). On a failed 
Evade, the target must make a second Evade test to avoid any flammable materials in 
his possession from catching on fire. Combat Manoeuvre, Maximise Damage.

Water: Water splashes around, acting as a bludgeoning weapon. For an extra Magic 
Point, this technique can create shards of ice with the same secondary effect as earth. 
Combat Manoeuvre, Stun Location.

Effect on Elementals: Double damage if targeted by an attack of the opposite element.

Example 1
A mage of the Way of Burning Hearts with a POW of 14 and an Elemental Mastery 
skill of 78% confronts a small pack of three tundra wolves. He has no offensive spells 
memorised  from  his  Primary Way.  He  chooses  to  do  damage  with  a  raw  elemental 
effect,  shooting  flaming  bolts  at  the  wolves  from  the  torch  he  is  holding. This  is  a 
Project  Element  effect  with  the  following  base  parameters,  taking  into  account  the 
mages POW and Elemental Mastery skill:

24
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Base Cost: 3 Magic Points
Range: 70 metres
Target: 1 creature
Duration: Instantaneous
Damage: 4d4 points of fire damage to a random location
Resist: Evade

Since he is facing three rather strong beasts he decides to increase the damage to 4d6 
which costs an additional Magic Point, have it affect the other two creatures which costs 
a further two points, and be harder to avoid, making the wolves Evade test Difficult 
(-20%) costing another two points for a total cost of eight Magic Points. He holds 
them off with the torch, waving it too and fro for the entire round while he enacts the 
technique. On the casters initiative in the following round fire lancets shoot from the 
torch, and the three wolves must make Difficult Evade tests (-20%). If their Evade test 
is a critical they take no damage, if it is a normal success they take 4d6 damage (being 
cold creatures and associated with Water, they are susceptible to Fire and take double 
damage), if they fail the Evade test they suffer 8d6 points of fire damage, on a fumble 
they take 6d6+12 of damage. A failure or fumble also requires the wolves to make a 
second Evade test to avoid catching on fire. 

Example 2
A sorcerer of the Way of Immovable Mountains, POW 15, is running from a formian 
colony in the company of his party (four extra members). They know the surface lies 
near,  as  they  turn  a  corner  they  find  themselves  trapped  in  a  dead  end. The  earth 
elementalist decides to risk it and take everyone through the rock. This is an Elemental 
Propulsion effect with the following base parameters:

Base Cost: 3 points
Range: 30 metres
Target: 4 creatures
Duration: 70 minutes
Effect: Burrow speed 20 metres
Resist: None

Passing  through  rock  instead  of  just  moving  across  its  surface  costs  an  extra  Magic 
Point, plus another point to include the fifth party member. The sorcerer decides he is 
powerful enough to maintain the control technique for enough time to take everyone 
to the surface, so the final cost is five Magic Points. It will take him a full round to 
enable the effect. The party huddles together and the earth buckles under the sorcerer’s 
will, taking them to the surface and away from the encroaching formians.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

25

Mastering Techniques
An  elementalist  may  become  so  familiar  with  a  raw  control  technique  that  he  can 
perform it with much more ease than other effects. He understands what he is doing 
and has practiced it long enough that he can skip some steps in the process.

A  mastered  technique  always  uses  the  same  parameters  to  achieve  the  same  effect, 
which allows the elementalist to use it as an Heroic Ability. This constancy also reduces 
the  cost  to  activate  the  technique  by  half,  so  in  the  case  of  Example  2  above,  the 
propulsion effect would cost three Magic Points but as with all Heroic Abilities, would 
only require a single Combat Action to use.

To  master  a  technique,  the  player  must  have  the  Elemental  Mastery  skill  of  the 
appropriate way of at least 75%, define all the parameters and spend an Improvement 
Roll for every Magic Point in the total cost of the technique. From now on, he can use 
this ability as many times as he can afford. An elementalist can master a number of 
techniques equal to one quarter of his INT characteristic.

The mastered technique will always have the same effect and cannot be changed once 
learned. A mastered technique requires no gestures or chants; it is an act of will only, 
although many elementalists are fond of naming the technique and shouting its name 
as they perform it.

For example, if the sorcerer in Example 1 were to master the Project Element technique, 
creating the flaming bolts from nothing, it would have a total cost of 10 Magic Points. 
He would need to spend 10 Improvement Rolls to gain the technique as an Heroic 
Ability, which he calls, Fire Knives. He can now use it at a cost of one Combat Action 
and five Magic Points. 

26
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Thalox was outnumbered, with little avenue for escape. The lesser salamanders had 
him cornered.

‘What should we do with you, human?’ one of the snakelike creatures mocked. ‘You 
can walk as fire but … can you dance like fire?’

‘If you give me some room, I can show you,’ Thalox bowed. 

The lesser salamanders were not friends of the elementals of Vulcanos, and here he was, 
deep in their territory on a mission from the royal salamanders, a human who could 
exist in this place thanks only to the magic at his disposal.

‘Do not try to call for help, our domain is sealed, you can summon nothing as your 
kind does!’

‘Who said I was going to summon anything?’ 

The sorcerer smiled and began casting his spell. True, he would not be able to summon 
the aid of fire elementals in their home plane but, if he could not bring, he could create. 
He smiled in satisfaction as a solid wall of fire rose in a ring around the salamanders, 
effectively imprisoning them. It wasn’t a perfect solution but at least now he would be 
able to complete his mission unmolested.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

27

Summoning Elementals

While many sorcery orders teach Animate (Substance – Element) the result, to a true 
elementalist, is less than satisfactory with the animated substance possessing no spark 
of  intelligence. Some priests can, and often do, summon true elementals associated 
with  their  god;  however,  these  are  basic  elemental  creatures.  There  is  potential  to 
summon quite large specimens that are also extremely powerful using this method but 
the creatures summoned only have minimal intelligence and are of limited use. The 
discipline of elemental summoning is less spectacular than that of elemental mastery, 
but it is no less deadly. Summoners specialise in their relationship with elementals and 
other denizens of the Elemental Planes, exploiting the fauna of the elemental planes 
to the fullest.

Calling  elementals  through  special  rituals,  the  summoner  is  not  limited  in  his 
summonings to brutish collections of matter but can also call native elemental creatures 
and even higher elemental; members of the Elemental Courts and possibly, Elemental 
Rulers. Sorcerers with enough power and the daring to use it can even call an Elemental 
Ruler in order to make long-lasting pacts of mutual assistance.

The two main contributions from elementalism to arcane practice are the elemental 
summoning rituals, known collectively as ‘major elemental summoning,’ and the art 
and science of trapping elementals in specially prepared receptacles, magical items that 
house—or  imprison—the  creatures  and  allow  their  owners  to  exploit  their  powers 
without the need to perform a summoning ritual every time they have need of them.

Major Elemental Summoning
Major elemental conjuration works through rituals, which are powered by the enactor’s 
will and an offering to the creature being called.

An elementalist can summon creatures of any element (except those associated with his 
Primary Ways opposite) but he works much better with those aligned to his Primary 
Way. 

Unlike the practice of demonology, the art of summoning elemental creatures is not 
a contest of wills for domination, unless an unscrupulous sorcerer wishes to bind an 
elemental against its will, but a lengthy diplomatic affair in order to keep the creatures’ 
interest  and  get  them  to  accept  a  deal.  Luckily  for  summoners,  base  elementals  are 
content with simple offers in exchange for their services, and the higher elementals are 
as curious about the Material Plane as the caster is eager to obtain their aid. 

28
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Elemental Lore
The  key  to  all  summoning  rituals  is  knowledge.  Even  if  elementals  are  simple  and 
without a complex political structure as demons have, it is imperative that any who 
would harness a sentient expression of a primordial force do so with full knowledge.

Fortunately, knowledge about elementals and their realms is readily available in most 
arcane libraries. Summoning simple elementals and elemental creatures is not difficult, 
with  sorcerers  sticking  to  the  most  basic  rituals  in  order  to  minimize  expenses  and 
effort. If they wish to invoke the more powerful higher elementals, not to mention 
Elemental Rulers, it is more than worthwhile to conduct more specialised research. 
Every advantage counts when dealing with these strong and temperamental entities.

Higher elementals and their rulers are individuals in every respect of the word, and 
while a general ritual may invite a random gnome into the summoning circle, targeting 
a  specific  creature  or  at  least  a  narrower  range  of  creatures  increases  the  chance  of 
success. One of the easiest facts to find is a creature’s allegiance and status in respect 
to the Elemental Courts. Calling for a herald from the minor court of Kerr’ka’kr the 
All-Consuming is more likely to attract the attention of a particular royal salamander 
of that court than if the ritual calls for any royal salamander to attend.

Second and most difficult to find out is an elemental lineage, which is a mixture of 
parentage and patronage. A higher elemental belongs to a family line independent of 
court allegiance, and sometimes that family includes a particular mentor the creature 
respects. The Elemental Courts chapter has more details on courts and status.

The strongest leverage to have in the summoning of an elemental creature is its name. 
An elemental has two names: the ones it uses daily and its True Name, which is always 
spoken in the creature’s native tongue. The caster must know what the True Name 
means in order to have any effect. A ritual containing a name always brings the same 
individual, with the True Name giving the summoner certain leverage in any following 
deal. The disadvantage of using names in a ritual is that there is a 10% chance that 
the creature is no longer alive, for the higher elementals have a more dynamic society 
and are not formless clumps of their element. This chance increases by 1% for every 
rank in an Elemental Court, and by another 1% for every die in its characteristics, 
to represent the sometimes-cutthroat politics of court intrigue and the risky life of a 
higher elemental adventurer.

Summoning an elemental requires two skills; Summon (Elemental) with four variants, 
one for each of the elements, Air, Earth, Fire and Water, and Lore (The Elemental 
Planes). Due to the affinity and closeness of the elemental planes with the material 
plane, summoning elemental creatures is far easier than summoning demons and their 
like, with individual sorcerers quite capable of summoning powerful entities. 

Once  summoned  a  sorcerer  must  bargain  with  the  elemental  for  its  service.  The 
negotiation is often a drawn out affair and uses the social skills; Influence, Insight and 
to a lesser degree, Perception, Evaluate and depending on circumstances, Seduction. 
It  is  also  considered  good  form  to  offer  a  suitable  gift  as  an  additional  enticement. 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

29

Social skills receive a bonus or penalty dependant upon how well the gift is received; 
roll on the Gift Modifier table below. It is always possible to force an elemental into 
service using an appropriate form of the Dominate (Elemental) spell, or by binding it 
to an object against its will with Bind (Elemental) skill; however, these practices are 
frowned upon. Sorcerers utilising these methods need to be exceptionally careful as 
the Elementary Rulers take a dim view of those that enslave their subjects and seek 
vengeance against any whom wittingly or otherwise cause harm to their subjects by 
such means.

Gift Modifier
1D10 Gift is…
1–2
3–4

Inappropriate or offensive
Unacceptable, sorcerer shows a lack of 
understanding or no gift provided
Barely acceptable
Acceptable, sorcerer has obviously done his 
homework
Perfect, sorcerer has a clear understanding of 
elementals motivations

5-6
7–8

9-10

Social skills become…
Hard (-40%)
Difficult (-20%)

Routine (+0%)
Simple (+20%)

Easy (+40%)

Summon (Elemental) (INT +CHA)
Summon is a ritual skill which in conjunction with Lore (The Planes) allows a sorcerer 
to invite an elemental creature to the material plane for a short while, generally, to 
perform a service of some kind or provide further knowledge of its realm. It may be 
utilised in several ways, either to summon a random creature, or call forth a specific 
elemental,  which  the  summoner  has  previously  researched  or  encountered.  The 
Summon (Elemental) skill is specific for each type of elemental, air, water, fire and 
earth and can never exceed the sorcerer’s Sorcery (Grimoire) skill for the appropriate 
elemental way. 

The ritual requires a considerable amount of preparation; one hour per Magic Point 
invested into the summoning and must be performed in area with sufficient volume 
or access to, the desired element to meet the summoned elementals SIZ requirements 
(lofty areas for Air elementals, lakes or seas for Water elementals and so on). If the 
summoning  involves  more  than  one  participant,  then  they  must  all  combine  their 
efforts. 

In emergencies a summoning can be rushed, taking only a minute per Magic Point, but 
this forfeits any sort of protective wards to contain the elemental; relying on the ritual 
leader to successfully convince the elemental to aid them. If this fails the elemental is 
free to act as it will, so such summoning’s are usually acts of desperation. Thankfully 
elementals,  unlike  demons,  are  curious,  rather  than  bloodthirsty  and  are  more  like 
to  assuage  their  curiosity  of  the  material  plane  for  their  allotted  time  than  go  on  a 

30
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Ritual Summoning
A lone sorcerer is capable of summoning very powerful elemental entities, albeit limited 
by his reserve of Magic Points. However, when sorcerers combine their talents using the 
Concert skill it is possible to summon elementals of potentially world shattering power.

By using a ritual summoning, a group of sorcerers can not only summon extremely 
large base elementals; they can combine elements to stunning effect. When combining 
elements  it  is  a  requirement  that  all  participants  have  both  the  Sorcery  (Grimoire) 
for  the  Elemental  Way  and  the  Summon  (Element)  skill  for  each  element  to  be 
combined. The leader uses his lowest applicable Summon (Element) skill for the ritual. 
Combining elements costs each sorcerer an additional Magic Point for each element 
to be combined to a maximum of three (the opposing Element to the lead sorcerers 
Primary Way cannot be combined). The Magic Points invested into the elementals SIZ 
are split evenly between each element. Characteristics are calculated for each element 
individually and then added together. The resulting elemental has the abilities of all its 
component elements.

For example, to alleviate a drought, Thalox and a handful of his students summon a 
huge storm elemental by combining air and water. Thalox and his students have both 
the Whispering Winds and Flowing Rivers grimoires. Thalox’s summoning skills for 
Air and Water are 65% and 45% respectively; his four students have skills of 35% and 
25%. To determine if the ritual succeeds Thalox rolls against his Summon (Elemental 
–Water) skill of 45%. The total of their Summon skills is 350%; they can invest  a 
maximum of 35 Magic Points into the ritual. Thalox determines that a 20 Magic Point 
combined elemental will suffice. Each sorcerer then expends five Magic Points, four 
each for the creature and an additional Magic Point for the additional element. Had 
they combines three elements, Air, Fire and Water it would cost each sorcerer six Magic 
Points The  elemental  has  the  following  characteristics  (see  the  Elemental  Creatures 
chapter for full details on Base Elementals), STR 20D6, DEX 6D6, POW 2D6 and 
INT 2. Its SIZ will be 20 cubic metres, it will have 20D6+120 Hit Points and its Brawn 
and Damage modifier will be based on its STR x 2.

Warning:  While  it  is  possible  to  summon  Higher  Elementals  using  a  ritual 
summoning, the beings brought forth in this manner are potentially God-like in 
power, so it is not recommended. Should adventurers choose to attempt this, the 
Games Master is encouraged to impose restrictions to the number of Magic Points 
invested in the summoning as best fits his campaign and the groups playing style.

destructive rampage, slaughtering all in the vicinity. Though accidents—forest fires, 
earthquakes, floods, whirlwinds and such— can, and often do, happen as the result of 
rushed summoning attempts, so the wise do so only when there is great need.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

31

Similar to concert cast spells participants in a ritual summoning pool their Summon 
skills, under the leadership of a single coordinator. The maximum number of Magic 
Points, which can be invested in the summoning, is one tenth of the group’s combined 
Summon skills.

Once preparations have been completed the ritual leader must roll against their un-
augmented Summon skill.

The result of the roll determines the effect of the summoning.

Critical:  The  elemental  arrives  in  a  magnanimous  or  subservient  mood,  any  gifts 
provided are considered perfect making all social interaction skills checks Easy (+40).

Success: The elemental arrives but requires convincing to perform a service. The ritual 
leader must negotiate its service (see above).

Failure: The elemental does not appear; the magic points spent in the summoning are 
lost.

Fumble: The elemental portal fails to form correctly. Roll on the Summoning Mishaps 
table.

Summoning Mishaps
D100
01–25
26–35

36–45
46–55
56–65
66–75
76–80
81–85
86–90
91–95

96–00

Result
The summoning has failed normally with no further effects.
The sorcerer gains a temporary insanity of the Game Masters choosing 
lasting 1D6 hours, days, weeks or years (roll on 1D4).
The sorcerer is rendered unconscious for 1d6 hours.
The sorcerer loses all Magic Points for 1d6 days.
The sorcerer is reduced to a drooling, gibbering idiot for 1d6 weeks.
The sorcerer gains a permanent insanity of the Game Masters choosing.
The sorcerer loses 1d6 POW permanently.
The sorcerer loses 1d6 INT permanently.
The sorcerer loses 1d6 x 5% from their Persistence skill permanently.
The summoning acts in reverse, transporting the sorcerer to the 
appropriate elemental plane.
The sorcerer creates an uncontrolled elemental gate that spews forth a 
number of cubic metres per hour of raw elemental energy equal to the 
total Magic Point cost. The gate lasts a number of days equal to one-
tenth the sorcerer’s Summon skill.

32
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

As part of the preparation process the sorcerer determines:

1)  The type of elemental to be summoned, be it a base elemental, higher elemental 

or specific elemental creature with a fixed Magic point cost.

2)  The number of Magic points to be invested in the summoning.
3)  In the case of higher elementals, the number and type of manipulations to be 

applied.

Base Elementals
Base elementals, as the name suggests, are the most rudimentary of elemental creatures 
and are the easiest to summon. Their characteristics and abilities are derived directly 
from their SIZ. The key difference between a summoned base elemental and the same 
volume of the chosen element animated by an Animate (Element) spell is the elemental 
has a modicum of INT and can follow simple instructions and perform slightly more 
complex tasks. 

For detailed descriptions of sample base elementals, refer to the Elemental Creatures 
chapter.

Higher Elementals
The key skill for learning the basic formulae for summoning higher elementals is Lore 
(The Planes). The check is a week of research that the caster spends digging up the 
knowledge he wants, and the difficulty depends on the obscurity of such lore. Each 
particular bit of lore adds a bonus to the Summoning check according to the following 
table.

Elemental Lore Table
Information
Specific Elemental Court
Court Position
Lineage
Common Name
True Name

Lore Penalty
-10%
-20%
-10%
-40%
-60%

Bonus to Summoning checks
5% of Lore skill
10% of Lore skill
5% of Lore skill
Summoning check is Simple (+20%)
Summoning check is Easy (+40%)

The  bonus’  and  penalties  are  not  cumulative,  use  the  higher  value.  For  example,  a 
sorcerer of the Way of Whispering Winds wants to summon a Duke from a specific 
court; he does his research, which takes a week and makes a roll against his Lore (The 
Planes) skill at -20% (court position). If his roll is successful he adds 10% of his Lore 
skill to the Summoning check. If he were researching the True Name of an elemental 
the penalty would be 60% but if successful, he would gain a 40% bonus to his Summon 
skill (which applies every time he wants to summon that particular elemental).

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

33

The Ritual
Once the sorcerer has obtained the information he seeks regarding the elemental he 
wishes to summon, he spends an hour per Magic Point inscribing appropriate elemental 
runes while reciting his invocation. At the end of the ritual he rolls against his Summon 
(Elemental) skill adding any bonuses. The results are determined as for base elementals 
above.

To  a  summon  a  Higher  Elemental  costs  a  minimum  of  five  Magic  Points;  one  for 
its  base  characteristics,  plus  one  Magic  Point  for  each  trait  common  to  all  Higher 
Elementals; Alternate Form (see the Elemental Creatures chapter for a full description), 
Magic Sense and Poison Immunity, and the advanced skills, Elemental Mastery and 
Summon (Elemental). Further Magic Points maybe spent to increase its characteristics 
using the number of Magic Points as a multiplier, e.g. a sylph has a base STR of 1D6 if 
two Magic Points are invested in its characteristics its STR becomes 2D6, three Magic 
Points 3D6 and so on. Additional magic points can also be used to purchase extra traits 
and advanced skills on a one-for-one basis.

Skills are increased at no additional Magic Point cost. Common skills and purchased 
advanced skills are increased from a pool of skill points equal to twice the sorcerers 
Summon skill. The maximum number of skill points a single skill may receive is equal 
to three times its base value.

All higher elementals have Elemental Control and Summon Elemental at their total 
Magic Point cost x 10%. So a higher elemental with a total summoning cost of 11 
Magic Points would have the Elemental Control and Summon Elemental skill at 110%

Pacts and Service
If  the  ritual  succeeds,  the  desired  creature  (or  a  close  approximation)  appears.  Its 
intentions are not automatically hostile; after all, it answered the invitation voluntarily. 
What follows is a period of bargaining and verbal manoeuvring. In the case of base 
elementals, this process is confined to a ‘would you do this if I gave you this?’ question, 
but it can get much more elaborate for higher elementals and other outsiders, as their 
goals and motivations are more complex.

Obviously, higher elemental summoning is a waste of time if all the character wants 
is for the creature to fight for him. A sorcerer would be better off summoning a base 
elemental  or  making  use  of  the  Animate  (Element)  spell.  What  the  rituals  for  this 
discipline are good at is extracting long-term agreements or special favours.

The  favours  and  services  are  similar  to  the  ones  a  caster  could  excise  from  demon, 
except that there is a price involved and the creature will not try to subvert the request. 
Also, the creature will not automatically try to kill the caster on a failed roll.

This exchange of offers can be represented by opposed Courtesy, Influence, Insight, 
Perception and dependant on circumstances, Seduction checks, with the caster gaining 
some  advantage  if  he  knows  the  creature’s True  Name,  follows  the  same  Elemental 

34
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Way, or has another ace up his sleeve. See the nearby Negotiation Modifiers table (the 
bonuses and penalties are not cumulative, use the higher value). The Games Master sets 
the price in exchange for the service, and the character is free to haggle. The following 
are the most common services and petitions, with some of the more common prices.

Court Allegiance: The elementalist may want to pledge allegiance to an Elemental 
Court. He needs to summon a Court official for this, not just any elemental, and his 
case must be debated with other officials and so it is not an immediate deal. Court 
allegiance means that the character gains connections with an Elemental Court and has 
an advantage when summoning creatures from that court. If he announces his visit to 
the court, he and any companion are protected from the plane’s adverse effects as long 
as he complies with etiquette and protocol. In exchange, the court’s ruler can contact 
the caster telepathically at any time and ask for favours and service just as a humanoid 
liege would do. The elementalist must be careful with whom he throws his lot, for wise 
Elemental Rulers will not abuse their Material Plane allies and expect the courtesy to 
be returned.

Elemental Knowledge: Sometimes the caster wishes to extend his elemental knowledge 
by asking a native. This kind of negotiation is conducted on a quid pro quo basis, with 
the creature asking a question for every answer it gives. Higher elementals will never 
reveal another’s True Name but will gladly accept an opponent’s True Name as payment 
for powerful elemental secrets. Other bits of elemental lore include spells, instruction 
in elemental mastery, knowledge about the plane itself, and so forth. The price for each 
fact varies depending on the creature’s attitude and actual knowledge.

Enter a Receptacle: The creature agrees to enter a previously prepared receptacle and 
allow the caster to use its powers (see below for information on creating and using a 
receptacle). Few creatures agree to this unless the price is high. Higher elementals are 
curious to know the Material Plane, and they ask that they be freed after a certain 
amount of time and allowed to wander the world at their leisure. The same ritual allows 
them to do so. Other, more ambitious elementals ask that the caster provide them with 
humanoid bodies to inhabit and control at will. They are content with artificial bodies, 
but living ones will convince them more readily.

Extended  Service:  The  caster  asks  the  creature  to  become  a  servant  for  a  specific 
period,  usually  a  year  and  a  day. This  service  is  similar  to  the  relationship  between 
sorcerer and familiar. To call the elemental creature to him, the character must make 
a Summon (Elemental) test. If using the creature’s common name the test is simple 
(+20%),  if  the  elemental’s True  Name  is  known  the  test  is  easy  (+40%). This  spell 
calls the specific elemental for the duration of a single specific task (an hour per Magic 
Point invested). The usual price for this service is that the caster creates a Pact with 
the elemental dedicating a negotiated amount of POW (which is then added to the 
elementals POW).

Single  Service:  A  single  service  is  a  specific  task.  Base  elementals  are  not  good  at 
following complicated instructions, so it is best to use them for minor, but mighty, 
tasks. Such services could include aiding in a ship’s sailing for air elementals, providing 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

35

water supplies for a long trip for water elementals, battering down a castle’s defences for 
an earth elemental, and burning down a building for a fire elemental. Base elementals 
require only the destruction of an appropriate offering worth from 100 to 5,000 Silver 
Pieces, depending on the service, but higher elementals and other outsiders may ask for 
a favour in return or impose a simple quest on the character. 

Negotiation Modifiers
The character …
Is an elementalist of the same Way
Is an ally of the creature’s court
Is a member of the creature’s court
Knows the creature’s True Name
Has freed an imprisoned creature of the same court
Has freed that same creature from imprisonment.
Is an elementalist of the opposite Way
Is an enemy of the creature’s court
Is a member of an enemy court to the creature’s
Has used Dominate (Elemental) on creatures of the same element
Has a prison receptacle in his possession (see below)

Modifier
+10%
+15%
+20%
+25%
+15%
+40%
–10%
–15%
–20%
–15%
–30%

Binding Elementals
Elementals,  and  Demons  for  that  matter,  can  be  bound  it  into  objects  to  allow 
whomever controls the object access to the bound creatures abilities in some form or 
another. The receptacle used is generally referred to as either a prison or a vessel. 

A prison captures the elemental and keeps it inside against its will, sapping its power 
slowly.  Prison  receptacles  are  dangerous  to  handle  because  the  trapped  creature  is 
always looking for a chance to escape, and if the wielder is not always on his guard, he 
could face a very angry elemental in addition to any opponent he wanted to unleash 
its powers upon. For the elemental, the interior of such an item is uncomfortable and 
cramped.

Vessels  require  less  care  in  their  construction,  as  they  host  a  willing  elemental. The 
creature spends its time inside the receptacle in comfort, if not luxury. Instead of forcing 
the creature inside the receptacle, the caster invites it through the lengthy summoning 
ritual detailed above and offers it a reward in exchange for its residence within the item. 
A vessel has a definite date when it will stop working: the day that the contract between 
caster and elemental ends.

Receptacles have only two powers: to hold an elemental creature and to open a hole in 
its internal wards just enough for the sorcerer to use its abilities and qualities. Without 
a  creature  held  inside,  they  are  harmless.  Receptacles  can  be  reused  as  long  as  they 
remain intact after its guest leaves, something that often does not happen in the case of 
prisons, as the creature’s second priority after killing its tormentor if it ever gets free is 
stamping the item into scrap.

36
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

‘Did I ever tell you that I need new furnishings in here?’ the sylph whispered in Thalox’s 
mind as he held the little bejewelled box.

‘Yes, oh precious one, you did.’ He smiled as he navigated his way towards the City of 
Brass. ‘But the Plane of Fire is not the best place to discuss interior decoration.’ 

Thalox chuckled when he heard the telepathic equivalent of a pout.

Almost  any  item  can  be  used  as  a  receptacle;  lamps  are  preferred  for  Air  and  Fire 
elementals, while bottles, bowls and boxes can be used for any elemental. Weapons, 
armour, rings and so forth make poor receptacles and are only used by unscrupulous 
sorcerers as prisons.

Capturing an Elemental
A  receptacle’s  power  comes  from  the  creature  inside  it,  and  its  magic  is  geared  to 
exploiting  the  powers  of  such  creatures.  An  empty  receptacle  is  more  useful  as  a 
paperweight than as a magical item, which is why its owner is well advised to keep an 
elemental creature inside it.

Vessels and prisons are fundamentally different in the way they exploit an elemental’s 
power. While in actual use they are the same, prisons are inherently more dangerous, as 
the creature trapped inside is always looking for a way out.

The way to power vessels is elaborate but fairly easy. Following the rules for elemental 
summoning, the caster attracts an elemental creature and proposes that it inhabits the 
receptacle in exchange for a favour, a service, or something else that the elemental and 
the caster agree to. The caster may cajole or threaten the elemental if it is within his 
means, and the creature may respond and honour a coerced agreement, but the caster’s 
standing among the Elemental Courts will suffer. That is all there is to it.

Getting an elemental inside a prison receptacle is trickier but faster and requires no 
negotiation;  the  elementalist  forces  the  creature  to  serve  him,  no  questions  asked 
or  favours  exchanged.  Once  the  creature  is  summoned  the  sorcerer  rolls  his  Bind 
(Elemental) skill, which is opposed by the elementals Persistence. 

Bind (Elemental) (POW x 2)
The use of this skill represents the contest of wills between an unscrupulous sorcerer 
and the elemental he has just summoned as he attempts to imprison it. It is always 
opposed  by  the  elementals  Persistence  skill.  Warning:  Elemental  rulers  may  seek 
retribution against sorcerers who make frequent use of this skill.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

37

If the sorcerer wins the test the elemental is forced into the receptacle. If the elemental 
wins the test…let’s just say the sorcerer had best have some protective wards in place…

Creating a Receptacle
To create a receptacle the sorcerer must first decide whether it is to be a prison or simply 
a vessel. If it is to be a prison the sorcerer must invest a number of Magic Points equal 
to the number of powers that he wants to be able to draw upon. The only way these 
Magic Points can be recovered is to destroy the receptacle – usually after the elemental 
has  been  killed  or  released.  Destroying  a  receptacle  frees  any  elemental  imprisoned 
within it and unless it has been severely weakened through use, it will use every means 
at its disposal to ensure its captor is suitably punished. Vessels are created in the same 
way but at half the Magic Point cost.

Using the Receptacle
Taking advantage of the trapped creature’s power requires the sorcerer to use a Combat 
Action and speak the appropriate command. Opponents within melee reach, as the 
wielder points the receptacle and unleashes its power, may make a free attack. 

Anyone  who  knows  the  command  words  can  use  the  receptacle’s  power,  but  only  a 
sorcerer who knows its operation can use it to trap other creatures or to keep them inside.

Escape
Elementals  trapped  against  their  will  are  always  looking  for  to  escape,  constantly 
probing  the  limits  of  their  prisons  for  any  weaknesses  they  can  take  advantage  of. 
One can only break free by forcing the sorcerer to re-roll against the Bind (Elemental) 
skill. Each roll can be attempted only during specific circumstances, and the prisoner 
does not miss an opportunity to try. The creature can try to escape when any of the 
following happens.

Elementals  Magic  Points  Exhausted:  If  the  sorcerer  expends  all  of  the  elementals 
Magic  Points  by  using  its  Elemental  Control  or  Summon  (Elemental)  skills,  the 
elemental can force the re-roll. There is a cruel irony; if the creature fails in its bid for 
freedom, not only are its Magic points restored, the item is also fully reset allowing the 
sorcerer full use of the elementals abilities.

Extra Ability Use: Any attempt to use more abilities per day than the Magic Points 
invested  into  the  prison  allows  the  elemental  a  chance  to  escape;  the  sorcerer  rolls 
against his Bind (Elemental) skill with a 10% penalty for each occurrence (10% for 
the first time, 20% for the second and so on). If the elemental wins it is freed and 
depending on its condition, will flee or take its vengeance. If it flees, it will return to its 
own plane to plot its vengeance.

Attempting to over use a Vessel does not pose the same danger as over using a prison: 
the  elemental  inside  simply  refuses  and  may  even  stop  working  until  the  wielder 
apologises.

38
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Damage to the Object: Every time the item suffers damage, regardless of its source, 
the creature can force the re-roll. If the source of damage corresponds to its element, 
it has a +10% bonus to the roll. If the receptacle is destroyed, the prisoner is freed 
automatically. This is the favourite method for the prisoner’s friends to try to liberate it. 
Calculate the item’s Armour Points and Hit Points as a weapon of similar size according 
to the tables in either the Legend Core Rulebook or Arms of Legend.

Travelling  to  an  Elemental  Plane:  If  the  character  visits  the  creature’s  native  or 
corresponding Elemental Plane, the creature can force a re-roll every hour the receptacle 
remains there. It is, of course, in very poor taste and potentially fatal to travel to an 
Elemental Plane with one of its citizens imprisoned in a receptacle.

Death: One of a receptacle’s possible abilities is to call the creature forth as if by using 
the  Summon  (Elemental)  skill.  If  the  creature  is  destroyed  in  combat,  it  dissipates 
and reforms on its native plane free of all bindings and is also free to plot its revenge. 
Trapped creatures will fight recklessly to force their own destruction and will not stop 
until  all  opponents  are  dead  or  the  receptacle’s  wielder  speaks  the  recall  command 
word.

Freeing the Creature
All receptacles have a command word to free the prisoner voluntarily, just in case the 
caster wants the space to trap a stronger creature if he feels capable of the feat. If it is 
the creature’s original captor who utters this word, he should have protective magic 
already cast on himself, as well as Banish ready, for the creature will attack him on sight.

However, anyone else finding the liberation command and using it will elicit a different 
reaction depending on the creature’s personality and the time it has spent imprisoned. 
Most often the creature will feel a debt of gratitude towards its liberator and will do 
whatever he wishes … once. However there are times when an elemental may try to 
vent its pent-up frustration on the first living thing it encounters namely the character 
who freed it, but it can be reminded that it would still be a prisoner otherwise. Freeing 
a  creature  trapped  in  a  receptacle  is  a  sure  way  to  win  the  favour  of  the  Elemental 
Courts.

Receptacle Powers
The following are the powers a sorcerer can utilise from the vessel. A number of powers 
may  be  chosen  equal  to  number  of  magic  points  invested,  once  chosen  the  powers 
cannot be changed. All powers use the summoned elementals skills for opposed rolls, 
particularly attacks and resistances. Each use of a power costs the owner a Combat 
Action.

Combat:  The  character  temporarily  releases  the  elemental  to  fight  for  him.  The 
creature has no limit to the time that it can remain out of the receptacle, but if it is 
destroyed it reforms on its native plane free of any bindings. Bound elementals act as 
if under a Dominate (Elemental) spell, however, they fight recklessly; endeavouring to 
seek their own destruction so they can plot their revenge once freed of their bindings. 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

39

Former vessel residents still expect the caster to fulfil his part of the deal should they 
be destroyed. The caster can recall the creature with the appropriate command as a 
combat  action,  and  the  creature  vanishes  into  the  receptacle  instantly. The  creature 
recovers Hit Points at double its normal rate per full day spent inside the receptacle.

Destroy Opposed Element: At great cost, the elemental creature can try to destroy 
an  elemental  creature  opposed  to  its  own  element.  Air  and  Earth  creatures  can  try 
to  destroy  each  other,  as  well  as  Fire  and Water  creatures.  Compare  both  creature’s 
Resilience, the one with the higher number destroys the other utterly but suffers 1d6 
points of damage for every 10% or part thereof of the destroyed creature’s Resilience. If 
this damage causes the creature a Major Wound, it is also destroyed. The creature can 
heal this damage as described above.

Elemental Burst: The elemental creates a powerful burst of its element coming from 
the receptacle. The burst is strong enough to cause 1d4 points of damage to a random 
location for every three points of the elementals POW and has a range of five metres 
plus one metre for every point of POW. This damage can be negated with a Critical 
Evade, halved with a successful Evade and is doubled on a fumbled Evade.

Elemental  Explosion:  The  creature  can  create  rippling  waves  of  elemental  force 
radiating outwards. All creatures in an area of 10 metre radius centred on the receptacle 
suffer  1d6  points  of  damage  per  three  points  of  the  elementals  POW  to  a  random 
location from the slashing winds, bouncing stones, licking flames, or wild water the 
receptacle emanates. A critical Evade negates the damage, a successful Evade halves the 
damage and a fumbled Evade doubles the damage but the victims must also roll make 
a successful Resilience roll or be knocked down, ending in a prone position a number 
of metres from the receptacle equal to the rolled damage. The person who utters the 
command word is immune to these effects.

Elemental  Mastery  Techniques:  The  creature  is  capable  of  reproducing  any  raw 
control technique from the Elemental Mastery chapter. Each technique counts as one 
ability and must be chosen at the time the elemental inhabits or is imprisoned in the 
vessel.

Reconnaissance: As the Combat ability, the character calls the creature forth but instead 
of commanding it to fight, he orders it to travel away to explore the surroundings. The 
creature moves as per its own speed and method of movement for an indefinite period 
of time and has a homing sense that allows it to know in which direction and how far 
its receptacle is at all times. If the caster utters the recall word, the creature returns in 
one quarter the time it has been away.

40
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Traits: The sorcerer can use any of the elementals traits on himself as a special ability. 
Each trait counts as one ability and must be chosen at the time the elemental inhabits 
or is imprisoned in the vessel.

Summon Elemental: The creature can summon a base elemental, or a number of base 
elementals, with a total Magic Point cost equal to one quarter of its remaining Magic 
Points.

Survival: The creature grants the receptacle’s user the ability to survive in its home 
plane for a number of hours equal to the elemental’s POW. The character can breathe 
water, is immune to fire, and can move normally in the air. This effect applies only in 
the Elemental Plane corresponding to the creature, not on similar conditions in the 
Material Plane like in a lake of molten lava or the ocean depths.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

41

The Elemental Courts

Hidden from any casual traveller, the Elemental Courts are built in the deepest recesses 
of the Elemental Planes. Few mortals know of their existence and the higher elementals 
like it that way. Let the planar dilettantes believe that the City of Brass is the greatest 
metropolis in the Plane of Fire and miss Vulcanos, capital city of the Pyrene Elemental 
Rulers, where the royal salamanders gather to discuss their business.

Whilst giants are not elemental creatures they have forged their dominions in their 
respective  planes,  they  managed  to  do  so  because  the  higher  elemental  powers  did 
not mind having such neighbours. The cities and settlements of the higher elementals 
are almost impossible to find in the infinite reaches of the Elemental Planes without 
specialised knowledge, or the favour and curiosity of their inhabitants.

Higher  elementals  are  easier  to  understand  than  their  base  counterparts,  for  they 
organise themselves in a semblance of the humanoid kingdoms and have a society of 
sorts. The similarities are in form only, for the sentient inhabitants of the Elemental 
Planes do not have the needs of the denizens of the Material Plane. They have no need 
to compete for land, for not only are their planes infinite, but particular ‘places’ move 
around in the currents and eddies of elemental movement, from the free-floating cities 
of the sylphs to the slow drift of the gnomides’ fortresses.

The elementals gather in settlements for mutual defence against threats like rampaging 
base elementals, efreet slavers, invading demons, and anything else that believes the 
Elemental Planes are a source of infinite resources. Since their personalities are not as 
diverse as those of Material denizens, their forms of government have changed little 
in millennia, and as labyrinthine as politics can get in the Elemental Courts, they all 
follow certain patterns.

The  Elemental  Courts  are,  in  short,  slow,  grand  plays  of  domination  and  one-
upmanship. While courtiers and nobles do get things done when it is time to marshal 
the elementals’ forces, most of the time they spend their time plotting against each 
other  in  elaborate  games  of  intrigue.  Of  course,  each  elemental  has  a  different 
approach to this most dangerous game; the passionate and destructive affairs of the 
royal salamanders cannot be compared with the slow and more honest dealings of the 
gnomides, nor do the fluid and changing allegiances of the undines bear similarities to 
the intellectual and complicated tactics of the sylphs.

42
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

‘A patrician …,’ the efreet eyed Thalox, ‘and envoy from Ignaris, yet you are flesh, you 
burn.’

‘I stand in the City of Brass,’ the sorcerer said, letting the marks of elemental favour 
from the Pyrene Court show. ‘I have presented myself as required; I have presented my 
liege’s petition as tradition dictates. I am a member of Court Ignaris and I shall not be 
insulted, lest you want war with the royal salamanders.’

Hierarchy
There are several courts in each Elemental Plane. Each has its own titles and status 
symbols, making navigating the Byzantine court politics an almost impossible task for 
a non-elemental. Some courts are more powerful than others, with low officers in one 
ranking as high as lofty nobles from another.

Elemental Rulers
At the top of each court is its ruler, a higher elemental of great power and status, able to 
command the respect and obedience of all in his domain. The power of an Elemental 
Ruler can be compared to that of a deity, or at the very least, a demi-god. The current 
rulers have been in their positions for so long that nobody, not even the elementals, can 
remember if there was anyone else ruling before them.

An Elemental Ruler embodies the personality and attitude of his court. In a way, the 
Elemental Ruler is his court. An observant visitor can pick up many clues as to how to 
act and what to expect from an Elemental Ruler just by watching his subjects carefully. 
If an outsider, whether from an Outer or the Material Plane, gains audience with a 
ruler, he must be very careful with his words and requests, for these greater elementals 
are pure expressions of Air, Earth, Fire, and Water.

Court Ranks
Below  the  rulers,  elemental  courtiers  have  a  more  mercurial  status,  with  positions 
changing as a noble falls from grace in the face of his peers and another takes his place. 
One thing that does place the Elemental Courts apart from their Material counterparts is 
that an elemental title brings real, palpable power, not just political. An elemental noble 
has the power to command and summon the lesser elementals, as well as to manipulate 
the plane’s element by force of will. This power is not as strong as the rulers’ power to 
shape kingdoms into being, but it marks its wielders as something above commoners.

The few elementalists who have studied the Elemental Courts classify the majority of 
titles and positions in five ranks. Upon attaining each rank, an elemental noble has 
its power increased in ways inaccessible to other higher elementals through study or 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

43

practice, and they lose those powers if they ever fall in rank. An elemental climbs the 
social ladder by proving worthy and by receiving the honour from the Elemental Ruler 
or a noble of higher status.

Each rank can be made up of a score of different titles and sub positions, shuffling up 
and down in the rank’s hierarchy, but they have the same power when dealing with 
members of a different rank. As it climbs through the positions, a higher elemental 
gains greater powers both political and physical but also acquires greater responsibilities 
towards  the  administration  of  the  territories  bound  to  his  court. The  Elementalist 
Order assigned the following designations to the ranks based on observation and study, 
but each court can have its own names.

• Patricians are privileged citizens, holding more status than commoners but still not 
fully part of elemental nobility. Knights and magistrates usually come from this rank.

• Qaestors are administrators and overseers, in charge of handling the court’s resources 
such as prisoners, drafting militia, and contacting planar travellers for aid. They are 
akin to feudal lords.

•  Rhetores  have  lesser  policy  responsibilities. They  have  more  decision  power  than 
quæstors  and  their  opinion  counts,  having  earned  the  Elemental  Ruler’s  trust  that 
when they speak, they speak for the court. Many ambassadors and military officials, as 
well as government councillors, are from this rank.

• Strategoi are true elemental nobility, able to act on their own and command great 
numbers of lesser-ranking elementals. They are in charge of court holdings away from 
the main citadels and act as military commanders in times of war.

• Praetors are few and for good reason, as the position is reserved to the greatest heroes 
and leaders of higher elemental society. When the Elemental Ruler is not available, the 
praetors dictate the court’s direction.

Court  ranks  are  used  to  assign  additional  powers  and  abilities  to  higher  elementals 
and increase the Magic Point cost of the summoning based on the elementals rank. A 
patrician for example, costs one additional Magic Point to summon, where a Praetor 
would add five Magic Points to the summoning. The abilities work only for elementals 
and  the  element  of  the  same  type  as  the  creature  and  do  not  stack  as  the  creature 
advances in rank. The new values replace the old.

Magic Points: An elemental noble has a number of bonus Magic Points he can use to 
power elemental mastery effects (see the ‘Elemental Mastery’ chapter for details). 

Summon  Elemental:  Once  per  day,  the  noble  can  summon  a  number  of  base 
elementals with a total SIZ of one quarter its remaining Magic Points. The elementals 
arrive and act in the same turn in which they are summoned, and obey the summoner 
blindly. This  ability  works  in  addition  to  any  summoning  power  the  creature  may 
already possess.

44
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Social  Skill  Bonus:  The  noble  adds  this  bonus  to  the  social  skill  rolls,  Courtesy, 
Influence, Insight and Oratory when dealing with elementals of lesser rank. It adds 
half this bonus to the above rolls when dealing with outsiders and other creatures with 
its same elemental type.

Elemental Court Ranks
Rank
1st Rank (Patrician)
2nd Rank (Quaestor)
3rd Rank (Rhetor) 
4th Rank (Strategos)
5th Rank (Praetor)

Bonus Magic Points
8
11
17
21
28

Social Skill Bonus
+10%
+20%
+30%
+40%
+50%

Outsiders in the Court
Sometimes a court accepts a foreigner into its ranks. It can be a creature associated with 
the element type or a material creature that expresses its allegiance to the Elemental 
Court. Dragons are honoured members of a court, as are some genies. Even powerful 
humanoid sorcerers have earned the right to call themselves part of a court, especially 
if they are elementalists.

Non-elemental creatures first join a court as commoners, beholden to the elemental 
nobles but also able to call for aid. They may climb to quaestor rank only and even 
then enjoy only the social skill bonus from a rank’s abilities. For summoners this is still 
a boon, as the bonus stacks with the summoning bonus for being part of a summoned 
creature’s court.

The Courts
The several courts that thrive in all Elemental Planes are governed as city-states, with 
each Elemental Ruler competing for supremacy with the sovereigns of other courts. 
In  all  this  internal  fighting,  the  courts  can  find  common  ground  in  a  central  city, 
a metropolis staffed by independent elementals where no guest is allowed to attack 
another.  Elementalists  have  been  unable  to  determine  which  authority  these  four 
central cities follow, but whispers and rumours speak of an elemental overlord, a true 
primordial deity to which all elemental creatures owe obeisance.

Vulcanos, the Courts of Fire
The city of Vulcanos is the central gathering place for the Pyrene Courts. Surrounded 
by colossal gouts of flame, it is hidden and protected from unwanted visitors. Its streets 
are made from pure lava and the buildings can only be described as solid fire. Royal 
salamanders live and thrive in Vulcanos; their outsider cousins the salamanders are not 
welcomed. Danbach are servants and commoners, and phoenixes find quick employ as 
messengers and sentinels.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

45

The following are the best-known courts of the Elemental Plane of Fire.

Ignaris: The Ruler of Court Ignaris is a passionate and single-minded being, and his 
dedication is contagious. All the Ignaris courtiers share a degree of dedication to a single 
cause not found in many fire creatures. It devotes most of its efforts to researching and 
developing new elemental mastery techniques and to learning in general.

Pyre an Halls: The Pyrean Halls embrace the more destructive aspects of fire and are 
the home of Kerr’ka’kr the All-Consuming. Pyrean courtiers are violent and aggressive, 
working out their disagreements in brutal duels instead of with intrigue and plotting. 
Martial strength is all that matters to the Pyrean elementals.

The Forge: Fire is the great changer, and nowhere else is this better exemplified than 
with The Forge. This Pyrene Court is one of the few that has good relationships with 
the salamander outsiders, as they share an interest in forging. Meritocracy rules the 
court, with the best crafters occupying the highest ranks. They trade constantly with 
the Plane of Earth for minerals to forge, and Pyrene steel has become legendary in 
strength and sharpness.

Aeolis, the Courts of Air
In  the  clear  environment  of  the  Elemental  Plane  of  Air,  the  city  of  Aeolis  is  easily 
confused with a cloudbank or with rolling mist. The vapours are quite solid, however, 
and shift and turn to simulate the movement of a normal cloud. There are no entrances 
except those that form when a sylph is going in or coming out. Minor air elementals 
perform menial work for the reigning sylphs and stopars serve as sentries and assassins.

The following are the best-known courts of the Elemental Plane of Air.

Boreas: This gelid place is home to the North Wind, the Elemental Ruler of Court 
Boreas. The  wind  is  always  blowing  and  it  is  the  strongest  movement  anyone  will 
ever find here. The Borean courtiers are cold and calculating, immersing themselves in 
complex plans and plotting against each other. Boreas is among the most intellectual of 
the Eupnea courts but also among the most ruthless.

Noto: The Southern Wind is a festive and warm one, totally unlike Boreas. The sylphs 
sworn  to  Noto  love  the  thrill  of  flight  and  are  constantly  curious  about  how  other 
heavier creatures manage to take to the skies. Politicking in this court takes the form of 
clever pranks, with the highest-ranking elementals being the ones who can think of the 
best jokes on others. Elementals of Noto do not take life too seriously and enjoy the 
freedom of their windy nature.

46
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Zephyr: The gentle West Wind is the most responsible among the Elemental Rulers 
of Air. Closely allied with some courts of Okeanos and Chthon, it nurtures what little 
life can grow on the floating islands of the Plane of Air, bringing rain and carrying the 
seeds from one patch of earth to another. Sylphs from Zephyr are gentle and helpful, 
standing at a middle point between the cavorting Noto and the intellectual Boreas.

Chthon, the Courts of Earth
The main city of the gnomides is impregnable, as it is essentially solid stone. A gigantic 
cave  with  walls  covered  with  equally  huge  crystal  growths  is  the  centre  of  the  city, 
with  smaller  caves  situated  around  it  with  no  tunnels  to  connect  them.  Elemental 
inhabitants move through the rock from cave to cave to conduct their business. Only 
creatures in the know are aware that any particular cave is part of Chthon, and several 
earth elementals guard the central cave to keep travellers from approaching. Xvator 
complement  the  guards,  while  gnomides  of  various  professions  fill  the  positions 
necessary for the city to work.

Axis: Virtually immobile, Axis is the most stable of all Elemental Courts. The core 
of  the  court’s  domains  is  a  great  pillar  of  adamantine,  around  which  the  gnomides 
gravitate  in  small  caverns  or  parallel  tunnels.  The  Axis  courtiers  maintain  a  series 
of  portals  to  many  Outer  Planes  as  well  as  gates  to  the  Material  Plane. They  pride 
themselves on keeping the world together, which might not be the truth, but at least 
they keep it well connected.

Geode:  A  collection  of  crystals  coating  a  cavern  system,  Court  Geode  nurtures  the 
creative side of its inhabitants. The gnomides keep the cavern’s open spaces so that 
sound can resonate along the crystals, creating a strange music that only one with the 
patience of an earth elemental can appreciate. Geodites are artisans in every sense of the 
word and remain as some of the gentlest of the higher elementals.

Terrexa:  As  solid  as  earth  can  be,  it  stores  unthought-of  reserves  of  energy.  The 
gnomides of Terrexa appear as any other of their kind: stolid, calm, and serene, but they 
are boiling inside, waiting for the right moment to unleash the fury of an earthquake, 
a landslide, or a cave-in. They associate closely with the Pyrean Halls from the Plane of 
Fire, as they together make volcanoes to puncture the barrier between planes.

Okeanos, the Courts of Water
Moving  with  the  currents  of  the  plane,  the  underwater  city  of  Okeanos  resembles 
a  coral  reef,  but  as  one  approaches  all  the  protuberances  take  the  shape  of  towers 
seemingly uninhabited but teeming with life. Undines welcome any and all creatures 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

47

able to survive underwater and treat guests from the Material Plane with pomp and 
circumstance. The higher elementals use the ushkya as mounts, training them to accept 
riders from among their allies, including aquatic elves and tritons. Rumours tell that 
even mermen are welcomed, as long as they keep to themselves and do not bother the 
other guests.

The following are the best-known courts of the Elemental Plane of Water.

Fathom: When the water of the plane darkens, a traveller may be approaching the 
holdings  of  Court  Fathom.  The  undines  from  this  court  are  mysterious  creatures, 
dedicated to the eternal quest for secrets and tangling them in enigmas. They archive 
every legend about the sea, rivers, lakes, and other bodies of water and have many gates 
to the deepest parts of the Material Plane.

Atlantis: A young court, as age goes in the Plane of Water, Atlantis took the name 
from the legendary lost city, as its elementals seek and collect all lost things, from the 
fabled city to small trinkets and childhood mementos. Its courtiers are whimsical and 
enigmatic, looking for a story for every new addition to their collection, which is not 
reserved to things lost at sea, or to just things either. Shipwreck victims may end up 
spending their afterlives in Atlantis with the beautiful undines, but they are given a 
choice.

Tethis:  Water  is  relentless.  If  it  is  blocked  it  finds  another  way,  and  if  there  is  no 
other way it makes its own. Tethan courtiers are patient and determined, able to invest 
terrible force with a smile on their faces. It is better not to cross an undine loyal to this 
court, as its hatred is sure to run deep and its revenge will be as brutal and definite as 
can be expected from an immortal being with all the time in the world. 

48
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

49

Elemental Magic

Many  of  the  spells  in  the  Legend  Core  Rulebook  are  suitable  for  elementalists  and 
campaigns that feature them. Whether the elementalists are adventurers or their nemesis 
makes little difference. Below are Common Magic spells and Sorcery Grimoires for 
each of the Order of the Four Elemental Ways. New sorcery spell descriptions, those 
marked with a *, are given under the entry for the applicable grimoire.

Common Magic
If the Games Master is using Common Magic in the setting then the below spells are 
taught by The Order of the Four Elemental Ways to its practitioners.

Countermagic,  Countermagic  Shield,  Detect  (Elemental  Type)*,  Protection  and 
Second Sight are universal spells taught by all four of the Elemental Ways.

* Detect (Elemental Type) is an exception to the restrictions for elementalists regarding 
their opposing way. Elementalists may learn to detect any elementals, with most orders 
teaching how to detect their elemental opposites in preference to all others, particularly 
their own.

The Way of Whispering 
Winds (Air):
The Way of Flaming 
Hearts (Fire):
The Way of Immovable 
Mountains (Earth):
The Way of Flowing 
Rivers (Water):

Skybolt and Speedart

Armoursmith’s Boon, Cauterise, Dragons Breath, Extinguish, 
Fire Arrow, Fireblade, Ignite, Light and Warmth.
Bludgeon and Mason’s Boon.

Chill, Frostbite and Water Breath.

Sorcery Grimoires
The Way of Whispering Winds (Air)
Grimoire: Abjure (Air), Animate (Air), Banish (Earth Elemental), Cyclone*, Diminish 
(INT),  Dominate  (Air  Elemental),  Elemental  Portal  (Air)*,  Enhance  (INT),  Fly, 
Neutralise Magic, Protective Ward, Smother, Telepathy, Wind Slam.

50
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Cyclone
Concentration, Resist (Evade*special)

This spell creates a powerful cyclone of raging wind that moves through the air, along 
the ground, or over water at a speed of 20 metres per round. The cyclone is three cubic 
metres per 10% of the casters Sorcery (Whispering Winds) skill. You can concentrate 
on controlling the cyclone’s every movement or specify a simple program. Directing 
the cyclone’s movement or changing its programmed movement requires the use of a 
Combat Action. The cyclone always moves during your turn. If the cyclone exceeds 
the spell’s range, it moves in a random, uncontrolled fashion for 1d3 rounds and then 
dissipates. (You can’t regain control of the cyclone; even if comes back within range.)

Any creature of less than SIZ 25 that comes in contact with the cyclone must succeed 
on  an  opposed  Evade  test  versus  the  sorcerer’s  grimoire  skill  or  take  1D4  points  of 
damage to all locations. Armour does not protect against this damage, though magical 
protection does. A creature of SIZ 18 or less that fails its first Evade test must succeed on 
a Difficult (-20%) Evade test or be picked up bodily by the cyclone and held suspended 
in its powerful winds, taking 1D6 points of damage each round to a random location 
on your turn. You may direct the cyclone to eject any carried creatures whenever you 
wish, depositing the hapless souls wherever the cyclone happens to be when they are 
released. The unfortunate victim is then subject to the appropriate falling damage and 
may have other issues to deal with, surviving being dropped in the ocean for example.

Elemental Portal (Air)
Concentration, Resist (Special, see text))

This  spell  creates  a  portal  to  the  elemental  plane,  in  this  case,  of  Air. The  sorcerer 
can create this portal vertically or horizontally. If created vertically it acts as a portal 
allowing the sorcerer and a number of guests to travel back forth between the planes 
for its duration. Only the sorcerer and those he designates as targets may pass through. 
A target tricked into entering the portal receives an opposed Perception test to realise 
they are in danger and then must succeed on a Difficult (-20%) Evade test to avoid 
stepping completely through.

If created horizontally, it creates a hole between the planes that allows one cubic metre 
of raw elemental energy per round to flow into the plane of origin for the duration of 
the spell. Creatures in the path of this energy can evade it, if harmful to them, with a 
successful Evade test. 

Wind Slam
Concentration, Resist (Resilience)

Blasts of compressed air slam into the target battering them mercilessly, crushing even the 
strongest armour. If the target fails to resist, every Combat Action the sorcerer can inflict 
a random location with an amount of damage according to their Sorcery (Grimoire) skill.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

51

1–20% 1D2 damage, 21–40% 1D4, 41–60% 1D6, 61–80% 1D8, 81–100% 1D10, 
101–120%
2D6, 121–140% 1D6+1D8, 141–160% 2D8 and so on.

Armour provides no protection but magical defences (such as Countermagic Shield or 
Spell
Resistance) reduce rolled damage by the Magnitude they normally block (assuming the 
target fails its Resilience roll).

The Way of Burning Hearts (Fire)
Grimoire:  Abjure  (Water),  Animate  (Fire),  Banish  (Water  Elemental),  Damage 
Enhancement, Diminish (POW), Dominate (Fire Elemental), Elemental Portal (Fire)*, 
Enhance (POW), Flame Bolt*, Firestorm*, Glow, Immolate*.

Elemental Portal (Fire)
As Elemental Portal (Air) except the destination plane is the elemental plane of fire.

Flame Bolt
Autonomous, Resist (Evade, Parry–Shield)

This spell allows the caster to fire a single bolt of flame at each target. Each bolt does 
1D8 damage plus one additional point of damage for each manipulation point spent 
on magnitude, thus the spell cast with a magnitude of two (one manipulation point) 
would deal 1D8+1 points of damage. The damage is fire and magical, armour protects 
against it normally. There must be at least one fire (natural or magical in nature) equal 
to or larger than a Large Flame within the spells range from which to draw the bolts.

Firestorm
Autonomous, Resist (Evade)

When a Firestorm spell is cast, the whole area, three cubic metres for every 10% of the 
casters Sorcery (Burning Hearts) skill, is shot through with sheets of roaring flame as a 
small Elemental Portal opens to the elemental plane of fire. The raging flames do not 
harm natural vegetation; any living creature within the area however, takes 1D6 points 
of  fire  damage  per  point  of  magnitude  to  a  random  location.  A  successful  opposed 
Evade test halves the damage, a critical Evade test negates the damage entirely.

Immolate
Concentration, Resist (Resilience)

This spell causes the targets skin to blister and burn as if set on fire. If the target fails to 
resist, every Combat Action the sorcerer can inflict a random location with an amount 
of damage according to their Sorcery (Grimoire) skill.

52
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

1–20% 1D2 damage, 21–40% 1D4, 41–60% 1D6, 61–80% 1D8, 81–100% 1D10, 
101–120%
2D6, 121–140% 1D6+1D8, 141–160% 2D8 and so on.

Armour provides no protection but magical defences (such as Countermagic Shield or 
Spell
Resistance) reduce rolled damage by the Magnitude they normally block (assuming the 
target fails its Resilience roll).

The Way of Immovable Mountains (Earth)
Grimoire:  Animate  (Earth),  Banish  (Air  Elemental),  Crush*,  Diminish  (STR), 
Dominate  (Earth  Elemental),  Earthquake*,  Elemental  Portal  (Earth)*,  Enhance 
(STR), Form/Set (Earth).

Crush
Concentration, Resist (Resilience)
This  spell  causes  excruciating  pain  as  the  weight  of  the  Earth  crushes  the  struck 
location, potentially breaking bones and leaving the affected area as a lump of useless 
flesh. If the target fails to resist, every Combat Action the sorcerer can inflict a random 
location with an amount of damage according to their Sorcery (Grimoire) skill.

1–20% 1D2 damage, 21–40% 1D4, 41–60% 1D6, 61–80% 1D8, 81–100% 1D10, 
101–120%
2D6, 121–140% 1D6+1D8, 141–160% 2D8 and so on.

Armour provides no protection but magical defences (such as Countermagic Shield 
or  Spell  Resistance)  reduce  rolled  damage  by  the  Magnitude  they  normally  block 
(assuming the target fails its Resilience roll).

Earthquake
Autonomous, Resist (Special–see text)
When you cast Earthquake, an intense but highly localized tremor rips the ground. 
The spell affects an area three metres in diameter for every 10% of the casters Sorcery 
(Immovable Mountain) skill. The shock knocks creatures down, collapses structures, 
and opens cracks in the ground and more. The effect lasts for one round, during which 
time creatures on the ground can’t move or attack. A sorcerer on the ground must make 
a Difficult (-20%) Persistence test or be unable to cast a spell. The earthquake affects 
all terrain, vegetation, structures, and creatures in the area. The specific effect of an 
Earthquake spell depends on the nature of the terrain where it is cast.

Cave, Cavern, or Tunnel: The spell collapses the roof, dealing 2D6 points of damage 
(average SIZ 10 above each creature) plus 1D6 points of falling damage per five metres 
in  height  to  three  random  Hit  Locations  of  any  creature  caught  under  the  cave-in, 
pinning that creature beneath the rubble (see below). A successful Hard (-40%) Evade 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

53

test avoids the damage but the creature remains pinned. An Earthquake spell cast on 
the roof of a very large cavern could also endanger those outside the actual area but 
below the falling debris.

Cliffs: Earthquake causes a cliff to crumble, creating a landslide that travels horizontally 
as far as it fell vertically. Any creature in the path takes damage as above and is pinned 
beneath the rubble (see below) except the Evade test to avoid the damage and being 
pinned is routine. Dependent on the situation however, those that succeed on their 
Evade tests may not be out of danger–cliffs are not a good place to be evading anything.

Open Ground: Each creature standing in the area must make a successful Athletics 
test save or fall down. Fissures open in the earth, and every creature on the ground 
has a 25% chance to fall into one (a Difficult (-20%) Evade test is required to avoid a 
fissure). At the end of the spell, all fissures grind shut, killing any creatures still trapped 
within.

Structure: Any structure standing on open ground takes 100 points of damage, enough 
to collapse a typical wooden or masonry building, but not a structure built of stone or 
reinforced masonry. Armour Points do not reduce this damage. Any creature caught 
inside a collapsing structure takes damage as per the Cave, Cavern, or Tunnel scenario 
above. Games Masters may need to adjust the damage based on the size of the building 
and its construction, the damage given is for a masonry building. 

River, Lake, or Marsh: Fissures open underneath the water, draining away the water 
from  that  area  and  forming  muddy  ground.  Soggy  marsh  or  swampland  becomes 
quicksand for the duration of the spell, sucking down creatures and structures. Each 
creature in the area must make a successful Evade test or sink down in the mud and 
quicksand. At the end of the spell, the rest of the body of water rushes in to replace the 
drained water, possibly drowning those caught in the mud.

Pinned Beneath Rubble: Any creature pinned beneath rubble takes 1D4 points of 
damage per minute to each struck location while pinned. If any location incurs sufficient 
damage to sustain a Serious or Major wound the creature must make Resilience rolls 
as appropriate.

Elemental Portal (Earth)
As Elemental Portal (Air) except the destination plane is the elemental plane of earth.

The Way of Flowing Rivers (Water)
Grimoire:  Abjure  (Water),  Animate  (Water),  Banish  (Fire  Elemental),  Damage 
Resistance,  Diminish  (CON),  Dominate  (Water  Elemental),  Desiccate*,  Drown*, 
Enhance (CON), Elemental Portal (Water)*, Form/Set (Water), Whirlpool*

54
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Drown
Autonomous, Resist (Resilience)
This spell fills the targets lungs with water taken from the atmosphere. A sorcerer may 
cast Drown on a target of up to 3 SIZ per 10% of his Sorcery (Flowing Rivers) skill.

If the target fails to resist he begins to drown, immediately suffering damage at the start 
of the following Combat Round and continues to drown for the duration of the spell.

Desiccate
Concentration, Resist (Resilience)
This spell causes flesh to wither and die as all moisture is removed from the targets 
struck location. If the target fails to resist, every Combat Action the sorcerer can inflict 
a random location with an amount of damage according to their Sorcery (Grimoire) 
skill.

1–20% 1D2 damage, 21–40% 1D4, 41–60% 1D6, 61–80% 1D8, 81–100% 1D10, 
101–120%
2D6, 121–140% 1D6+1D8, 141–160% 2D8 and so on.

Armour provides no protection but magical defences (such as Countermagic Shield 
or  Spell  Resistance)  reduce  rolled  damage  by  the  Magnitude  they  normally  block 
(assuming the target fails its Resilience roll).

Elemental Portal (Water)
As Elemental Portal (Air) except the destination plane is the elemental plane of water.

Whirlpool:
Concentration, Resist (Evade*special)

This spell functions as per the Cyclone spell above except it creates a whirlpool in a 
body of water.

Any creature of less than SIZ 25 that comes in contact with the Whirlpool must succeed 
on  an  opposed  Swim  test  versus  the  sorcerer’s  grimoire  skill  or  take  1D4  points  of 
damage to all locations. Armour does not protect against this damage, though magical 
protection does. A creature of SIZ 18 or less that fails its Swim test must succeed on 
a Difficult (-20%) Resilience test or begin to drown. To escape the Whirlpool once 
caught requires a successful Hard (-40%) Swim test each round. Each round after the 
first, regardless of SIZ, all creatures caught in the Whirlpool must succeed on Difficult 
(-20%) Resilience test or begin to drown.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

55

Ships and boats are handled somewhat differently. The captain, or person controlling 
the ship at the time, of any boat or ship that comes in contact with the Whirlpool must 
succeed on a Difficult (-20%) Boating or Shiphandling test as appropriate for his vessel 
versus the Sorcerers (Flowing Rivers) skill or be caught in the vortex. Once caught, 
to escape the Whirlpool requires a successful Hard (-40%) Boating or Shiphandling 
roll as appropriate. Each round a boat or ship is caught in the Whirlpool it takes 1D8 
points of damage for every 10% of the sorcerer’s Sorcery (Flowing Rivers) skill. The 
ships hull protects it from this damage, in the same manner as creatures are protected 
by Armour Points. Damage that exceeds the ships hull rating is applied against the 
ships Structure Points. Every full, five points of structural damage (per round) reduces 
the ships Seaworthiness Points by one. Once the ship’s Seaworthiness falls to zero, its 
day is done. The vessel will begin to swamp, a process that takes one Combat Round 
for every metre of the ship’s length. When a ship is fully swamped, it will sink.

If a ship’s Structure Points are ever reduced to zero, the ship immediately begins to 
break apart. What remains is useful only as life rafts for the surviving crew.

The  full  rules  for  shiphandling  can  be  found  in  Arms  of  Legend. The  table  nearby 
summarises the key data for the ships presented in Arms of Legend. If you are using the 
rules from Pirates of Legend in your campaign, substitute the ship information from 
that book.

56
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Ship
Barge
Barque
Bireme
Brigantine
Canoe; Hide 
(Dugout)
Carrack
Cog

Hull
3
4
3
4
1 (2)

4
4

Corvette
4
Fishing Boat 3
Fluyt
4

Frigate

Galleon

Indiaman

Junk

Longship

Raft
Rowboat
Schooner

5

5

4

3

3

1
2
4

Small Trader 3
4
Snow

Trireme
War Galley

War Junk

4
3

4

Structure 
Points
100
350
60
250
4 (6)

Seaworthiness
10
25
12
15
7

Length
12m
100m
20m
30m
3

Skill*
Boating
Shiphandling
Boating
Shiphandling
Boating +20%

100
80

150
100
200

250

350

300

75

70

50
15
180

100
220

80
40

15

25
28

18
18
20

20

20

15

20

20

10
15
20

18
18

18
12

15

26m
24m

18m
7.5m
30m

40m

50m

50m

25m

28m

6m
3m
30m

12m
30m

37m
27m

50m

Shiphandling
Shiphandling 
+10%
Shiphandling
Boating
Shiphandling 
-10%
Shiphandling 
+10%
Shiphandling 
-10%
Shiphandling 
-10%
Shiphandling 
+10%
Shiphandling 
+20%
Boating -10%
Boating
Shiphandling 
+10%
Shiphandling
Shiphandling 
-10%
Shiphandling
Shiphandling 
-10%
Shiphandling

* Skill bonuses and penalties are cumulative. Therefore the captain of a galleon making 
a difficult Shiphandling test would do so at -30%.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

57

Elemental Lore

As with so many of the creatures depicted in fantasy role-playing games, elementals 
originate in folklore, myth and legend. In particular, given their strong otherworldly 
and magical associations, it is no surprise to find that the four elements derive from 
philosophical and religious sources. 

This  chapter  takes  a  look  at  the  origins  of  the  elements  and  elementals  in  human 
thought,  so  as  to  give  Games  Masters  and  players  alike  a  better  idea  of  how  the 
elementals might fit into the particular world they game in. This can be useful both 
for deciding on the ‘real’ cosmogony of your game world, and for devising religious or 
philosophical ideas (right or wrong) concerning that cosmogony. 

The Greek Philosophers
The idea of the four elements as earth, air, fire and water derives from a number of early 
Greek philosophers, but Plato and Aristotle are the two who seem to have done the 
most to systematise this idea. They believed that everything in existence was composed 
of one or more of the elements, including all living creatures. 

The Platonic Solids
For a gamer, perhaps one of the strangest and most intriguing concepts from the Greek 
philosophers is that each element is directly correlated to one of the Platonic Solids, 
the three-dimensional geometric shapes that are more familiar to us as d4s (fire), d6s 
(earth), d8s (air), and d20s (water). Each of these shapes, it was believed, gave its form 
to the atoms that made up that particular element and any elemental creatures formed 
from that element. 

How you incorporate this into a game, if you incorporate it at all, is up to you. It might 
be stylistically neat to have specific element- or elemental-related tables use only dice 
of the elementally appropriate type. The very shapes of the dice you use to game with 
are directly related to the concepts of the elements, with the d4’s tapering, flame-like 
silhouette, the d6’s solid, cubic nature, the d8’s expansive appearance and the d20’s 
resemblance to the water-covered globe of Earth. 

Another possibility is that the Platonic solids represent the true form of the appropriate 
elementals. Base elementals are also considered to always be in this form, since none 
of them have alternate forms in any case, though the Games Master can alter this if 
he prefers a more traditional fantasy-game look to all his elementals (or if he favours a 

58
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

different philosophical or mythical viewpoint as to the nature of the elementals, such 
as the others listed in this chapter). 

Quintessence
Aristotle postulated the idea of a fifth element, which became known as quintessence. 
It was thought of as the substance from which the heavens were made. Some theories 
suggested it was composed of a mixture of the other four elements. It is also occasionally 
correlated with the fifth of the Platonic solids, the dodecahedron (or d12, to you and 
me). 

Later  occultists  regarded  the  quintessence  as  similar  or  identical  to  the  element  of 
spirit,  which  supposedly  governs  the  other  four  elements  and  again  is  made  up  of 
all four. This is sometimes divided into ‘Spirit Active’ and ‘Spirit Passive,’ or positive 
and  negative  energy,  giving  six  elements  in  total.  Depending  on  the  cosmogony  of 
the Games Master’s campaign, he may wish to create his own elementals representing 
aspects of the spirit or quintessence element combined with one of the four standard 
elements. 

The Four Humours
The  idea  that  everything  in  existence  was  made  from  one  or  more  of  the  elements 
led to a theory in which illnesses were treated according to supposed imbalances in 
the elemental composition of the patient. The fit, healthy person was thought of as 
perfectly balanced, with equal parts from each of the four elements. All disease and 
illness was incorporated into this scheme, so that a person thought to be suffering an 
excess of fire might be given a water-oriented cure. This formed a fundamental part of 
Greek medicine, many of the theories of which were to continue to influence doctors 
and surgeons right through to medieval times and beyond. 

The Hindu and Buddhist Elements
In the oldest Hindu texts, only three elements are mentioned: air, earth and fire. These 
are correlated with the castes of society, with fire representing the warrior aristocracy, 
air the scholars and priests, and earth the lower classes. A campaign with an ancient 
Hindu-style setting might impose restrictions as to which type of elemental may be 
summoned by which character, depending on his social caste. 

Later Indian writings, with more of a Buddhist influence, incorporate the elements of 
water and eventually a fifth element. It seems likely that these additions were made due 
to some discourse between the Greek and Indian cultures of the time, given the close 
correlation the eventual five elements of Buddhism have with those of Greece. These 
five elements travelled around the world with Buddhism, and are incorporated into 
mystical and magical traditions as far as Japan. 

The fifth element in Buddhist tradition is usually translated as ‘Void,’ and it is under 
this name that most people will have come across it, if at all. However, the original 
name akasha has a broader meaning, with hints of ‘sky,’ ‘heaven,’ and ‘ether,’ which 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

59

are quite close to the Greek conceptions of quintessence. In their Zen Buddhist form, 
the  five  elements  form  a  part  of  Japanese  martial  arts  tradition,  with  void  typically 
signifying emptiness of mind prior to and during combat, rather than emptiness of 
space. 

The Aztec Elements
Aztec tradition incorporates the elements into its creation myths, with the idea being 
that each element destroyed all life on Earth in one of four previous ages. This fits in 
quite well with fantasy notions of elementals as primordial and powerful beings, and is 
incorporated at the end of the creatures’ chapter in the form of earth jaguars and wind 
serpents. 

Each  age  was  destroyed  by  the  wrath  of  the  gods,  who  had  been  angered  by  the 
inhabitants of the Earth ignoring their commands. 

The First Sun: The world of the first sun was destroyed by great earth jaguars, which 
devoured it and its inhabitants completely. This represented a death by the element 
of  Earth.  Giants  roamed  the  earth  during  the  era  of  the  first  sun,  as  did  scattered, 
animalistic humans. 
The Second Sun: The world of the second sun was devastated by a terrible hurricane 
caused by wind serpents, which slew all its inhabitants. This represented a death by the 
element of Air. This world had been a time of airy beings of spirit, though there were 
also a few humans. 
The Third  Sun:  The  world  of  the  third  sun  was  consumed  by  flames,  along  with 
everything upon it. Clearly this was death by the element of Fire. 
The Fourth Sun: The world of the fourth sun was drowned by a number of great 
waves causing a disastrous deluge that swept away all life. This represented a death by 
the element of Water. 

The  author  J.  G.  Ballard  described  a  similar  series  of  world-deaths  by  the  classical 
elemental forces in his four post-disaster novels, The Wind from Nowhere, The Drowned 
World, The Burning World and The Crystal World. Though these have a theoretically 
modern setting, the ideas of elemental transformation and destruction presented  in 
them can be applied to great effect for Games Masters wishing to portray Aztec-style 
total devastation in a campaign. 
The Chinese Elements

There  are  five  elements  in  Chinese  tradition,  earth,  fire,  metal,  water  and  wood.  As 
with Western views of the elements, these are seen as metaphors and symbols running 
throughout life and creation, as well as being the literal elements of which things are made 
up. Thus as a parallel to the Greek view of disease as being derived from an imbalance 
in the Four Humours, Chinese traditional medicine makes extensive use of the elements 
and their relation to the human body in attempting to heal a variety of ailments. 

60
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

As the primary focus of this book, the Four Elementals Ways, is based on Western 
tradition, the creatures’ chapter provides two new Chinese elementals for those wishing 
to include the Chinese elements (metal and wood) in their game.

Judaism and Qabala
Qabala, the Judaic mystical tradition which is based around interpreting secret codes and 
messages in Biblical and other sacred texts, as well as around classifying every aspect of the 
universe, incorporates the four classical elements to a great extent. The very worldview of the 
qabalist incorporates the four elements at a fundamental level, with the entire universe being 
divided into the realms of Atziluth (fire), Briah (water), Yetzirah (air) and Assiah (earth). 

Unlike the elemental planes, these elemental realms incorporate almost every possible 
supernatural region or mental state, from the heavens of Atziluth to the material world 
of Assiah. Atziluth is the world of abstract creation, where ideas, concepts, and even 
creatures are first conceived. Briah is the world of archetypes, where the abstract concepts 
of Atziluth begin to take on certain specific attributes depending on the eventual form 
of the creation. Yetzirah is the world of formation, in which the archetypes take on the 
form into which they will incarnate in the material world of Assiah. Assiah is the world 
we live in on a day-to-day basis. 

Given all the above, in a Judaic style setting the earth elementals would need to be 
considered as living beneath the earth, rather than in some abstract extra planar space. 
Atziluth is quite literally the realm of supreme godhead, though major gods of one kind 
or another inhabit all three of the worlds above Assiah. 

Alchemists & Astrologers: Medieval and Beyond
The scholars and magicians of medieval Europe seem to have been the first to expand 
on the idea of the four elements so as to devise a number of directly related entities, 
known naturally enough as elementals. They gave these creatures names, depending on 
the element they were associated with: gnomes or gnomides (earth), salamanders (fire), 
sylphs (air) and undines (water). 

Full game statistics for these and the other ‘higher’ elemental types can be found in the 
Elemental Creatures chapter. 

It was believed that the elementals could be deliberately manifested on the material 
plane at the behest of the magician, where they would perform various services and 
tasks at his command. Different elementals excelled at different tasks.

Furthermore, different elementals tended to have specific personalities, as appropriate 
to their elements. As was typical for the alchemists and astrologers of the time, each 
elemental was regarded both in an ‘ill-dignified’ way and a ‘well-dignified’ way, that is, 
each type had specific virtues and flaws which might or might not be manifested in any 
particular individual.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

61

For the most part, elementals’ personalities are strongly tied to the particular element 
they are built up from. It must always be borne in mind however that each type of 
elemental will be at least a little different from each other, so that a stopar will typically 
be more arrogant than most air elementals, for example. There is not a huge range of 
personalities within each type of elemental, however; so one stopar is likely to be much 
like any other. 

Below  are  character  descriptions  of  the  elementals  of  Air,  Earth,  Fire  and  Water. 
They are general in nature rather than going in to detail about each elemental race. 
Game Masters are encouraged to build upon these archetypes to develop truly unique 
elemental characters and races.

Air
Sylphs  and  other  air  elementals  are  regarded  as  highly  active,  just  like  the  wind. 
However, they can also be somewhat flighty, fickle, and frivolous. A sylph may change 
its mind– and its allegiance, if any–with barely a moment’s thought. 

Earth
Gnomides are regarded as having a precise and expert knowledge of all the mineral 
veins and buried treasures of the earth. It was for this that they were most commonly 
called up. Their very name derives from the Greek word ‘gnosis’ meaning ‘knowledge,’ 
though knowledge is not usually regarded as a characteristic of earth elementals! This 
knowledge, though, comes with a great desire to keep the gems and minerals exactly 
where they are. This attitude is often interpreted as materialism. Gnomides and other 
earth elementals are also considered to be extremely hard working, reliable and focused. 

Fire
Royal salamanders and other fire elementals are believed to be highly energetic and 
exuberant, though this can sometimes shade over into anger and aggression. This is 
perhaps inevitable in a creature that has the potential to be so destructive! They have 
notoriously short tempers, and do not suffer fools gladly. 

Water
For undines and other water elementals, the key word to describe their personalities 
is flexible. They are able to accommodate almost any point of view, or possibly several 
simultaneous points of view. This can make them useful allies, though its benefits are 
somewhat balanced by the extreme laziness that so many water elementals demonstrate. 
Used to being simply carried along by tide and current, they rarely seem interested in 
activity if they can possibly help it. 

62
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

63

Elemental Creatures

The  fauna  of  the  elemental  planes  falls  into  three  broad  categories,  the  primary 
two  being;  true  elementals,  base  elementals  and  higher  elementals;  and  elemental 
creatures,  elemental  versions  of  the  material  planes  mundane  and  magical  beasts. 
The third category, is made up of creatures from other realms that share an affinity 
with a particular element and choose to make their homes on that particular plane 
(fire breathing dragons living on the elemental plane of fire for example), and specific 
creatures  that  aren’t  true  elementals  (though  they  may  share  traits  with  them)  or 
reflections of creatures from the material plane.

All creatures affiliated with a particular plane are vulnerable to attacks from creatures 
and spells from that planes opposite element. All such attacks and spells inflict double 
the listed damage.

Base Elementals
Base elementals are dimly intelligent entities that lack CHA or CON and are thereby 
immune to any effects that require Resilience rolls. An elemental’s SIZ is represented 
as a volume rather than a number, as these nebulously formed creatures have no set 
proportions.  For  example,  an  elemental  may  be  described  as  having  a  SIZ  of  three 
cubic metres. When a numerical value is needed for an elemental’s SIZ, the elemental’s 
normal Hit Points may be used as its SIZ. For example, if an elemental with 10 Hit 
Points climbed into a box and was lifted by an adventurer, its SIZ could be treated as if 
it was 10. Normally, however, salamanders and sylphs have little or no mass, composed 
as they are of fire and air.

As fixed INT creatures, base elementals tend to act on very basic instincts. They do 
not have the base physical needs biological entities have, such as eating, sleeping and 
reproducing and are usually inactive. If threatened, elementals will defend themselves or 
flee, otherwise they simply do what is natural for their form: undines flow to the lowest 
spot and sit there, sylphs float on the wind, gnomes stand immobile and salamanders 
lounge about setting fire to nearby objects. These are the elementals priests call forth 
from their deities with the Summon Elemental spell.

Base  elementals,  no  matter  their  composition,  may  be  struck  and  damaged  with 
normal  weapons,  breaking  up  their  construction  and  eventually  disrupting  the 
underlying matrix. Base elementals have only one Hit Location and no armour. When 
an elemental is reduced to zero Hit Points, the material being animated as its body 
immediately dissipates (or collapses, in the case of gnomes and undines) and its spirit 

64
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

returns  to  the  other  world. The  spirit  may  be  summoned  again  to  inhabit  another 
vessel of the appropriate type.

Base elementals attack by engulfing their enemies and cannot be parried, only evaded. 
Failing to evade usually leads to being harmed by some secondary effect. A successful 
attack  roll  is  always  required  to  strike  an  elemental,  even  if  one  currently  engulfs 
the  striking  character.  Elementals  do  not  parry  or  evade  blows  in  combat,  but  are 
compensated by being naturally immune to most combat manoeuvres which might be 
used against them.

Base elemental characteristics, apart from DEX, are based upon the elementals SIZ. 
Refer to the table below to determine base elementals characteristics. Each point of SIZ 
equates to a volume of 1 cubic metre and costs 1 Magic Point.

Characteristic
STR
DEX (fixed)
POW
INT
Hit Points
Brawn & Damage Modifier

Gnome
1D6+6
1D6
1D6
1
1D6+6
STR x2

Salamander
1D6
3D6

Sylph
2D6
4D6

Undine
2D6
2D6

NA

STR x2

STR x2

Gnomes
A gnome is an elemental of the earth, composed of soil and pebbles. A gnome cannot 
be summoned or travel through areas composed of solid rock. Instead gnomes move 
through the earth, travelling just below the surface and often leave a trail of disturbed 
soil that marks their passage. A gnome cannot leave the earth and when seen in the 
open, it appears to be a slow whirlpool of dirt.

Abilities
A gnome can open up pits in the soil, make tunnels and find buried objects. It can 
also be used for holding objects stuck into the dirt, keeping loose tunnel roofs from 
collapsing  and  forming  mounds,  ridges  and  ditches  in  the  soil  no  larger  than  the 
elemental’s volume.

A gnome can carry a person with it as it swims through the soil, provided it is strong 
enough to lift the person. The gnome cannot, however, provide air for that person and 
unless the person being carried has some magical means of breathing, he may suffocate 
during the trip. A gnome can only carry an unresisting passenger in this manner. A 
gnome can carry as many people as its STR can handle.

Combat
A gnome attacks by dragging its victims into the ground. It can swallow up targets of 
up to 10 points of SIZ for each cubic metre of its volume. If it can engulf over half the 
SIZ of an enemy, the victim is dragged down to its waist (or fore and hind quarters) 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

65

and  cannot  manoeuvre.  A  creature  so  trapped  may  make  an  opposed  Athletics  or 
Brawn test against the gnome’s Brawn skill to break free. If the gnome can engulf the 
entire SIZ of an enemy, then he begins to suffocate. Escape requires the same opposed 
test but this time at a –20% penalty.

If the gnome is large enough, it may attack several enemies simultaneously, provided 
they  are  in  close  proximity  to  each  other.  Once  a  gnome  has  enveloped  its  victim, 
it  may  additionally  crush  them–inflicting  the  gnome’s  Damage  Modifier  to  all  Hit 
Locations engulfed every round. Armour protects against this damage. 

The following is the entry for a gnome of three cubic metres.

GNOME

1D20 Hit 

AP/HP

Location
Body

1–20

-/29

1

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier +1D12
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

11
4m
+4

Dice
3D6+18

Avg
29
—
3 cubic m —
3

STR
CON —
SIZ
INT
POW 3D6
DEX
1D6
CHA —

3
11
4
—

Armour: None
Traits: None
Vulnerability: All attacks from air based elementals, creatures and spells do double damage.
Notable Skills:  Engulf 100%, Perception 30%, Persistence 43%

Salamanders
Salamanders  are  elementals  of  fire,  composed  of  living,  writhing  flame. They  must 
be  summoned  from  an  existing  fire  large  enough  to  accommodate  the  salamander’s 
SIZ. Once formed, a salamander can move about at will without being extinguished 
– except by a large amount of water or earth. A salamander does not even need fuel, 
though considering that setting things on fire is more or less the salamander’s raison 
d’être, it is likely to ignite anything it can.

Abilities
A salamander will ignite any flammable object it touches. Given sufficient time it will 
heat (and eventually melt) metal, bake pottery or even crack stone. A salamander can 
be used to douse natural fires, so long as it has a volume equal to or greater than that 
of the fire. A salamander cannot quench other salamanders, nor can it extinguish a 
Fireblade spell or other magical flames. The salamander simply enters the fire and sucks 

66
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

it into itself, incidentally healing itself a number of Hit Points equal to a round’s worth 
of damage from the quenched fire.

Salamanders can float through the air at the same rate as they move on the ground. A 
salamander must touch an object to ignite it.

Combat
In combat, a salamander engulfs its foes in flame. It can swallow 10 SIZ points of an 
enemy per cubic metre of volume. For the sake of simplicity, if the salamander can 
envelop over half the SIZ of its victim then it has engulfed either the lower half of 
the body (both legs and the abdomen), or the upper half of the body (Chest, Arms 
and Head) if floating. If it can fully encompass its victim, then it affects all its Hit 
Locations. Every round, a salamander inflicts one point of damage per cubic metre on 
all locations it has engulfed. For example, a five cubic metre salamander can completely 
engulf a normal-size human and will inflict 5 Hit Points of damage every round to 
every one of the human’s Hit Locations. Armour protects against this damage at half 
its usual AP value.

The following entry is for a salamander of three cubic metres.

SALAMANDER

1D20 Hit 

AP/HP

Location
Body

1–20

-/29

Combat Actions
2
Damage Modifier —
Magic Points
11
Movement
8m
Strike Rank
+7

Avg
11
—
3 cubic m —
3

Dice
STR
3D6
CON —
SIZ
INT
POW 3D6
DEX
3D6
CHA —

3
11
11
—

Armour: None
Traits: None
Vulnerability: All attacks from water based elementals, creatures and spells do double damage.
Notable Skills:  Brawn 58%, Engulf 100%, Perception 35%, Persistence 43%

Sylphs
Sylphs are elementals of the air and thus can be virtually anywhere that is not underwater. 
They are tangible, formed out of what feels like solidified air. Sylphs are always invisible, 
though a sylph that wishes to be seen may pick up loose dirt or incorporate smoke into 
its body to make itself visible. Sylphs have no fixed volume and SIZ is primarily used 
to determine how much damage the creature can inflict in combat.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

67

Abilities
A sylph can carry objects or people with a total SIZ equal to or less than the sylph’s 
STR. A sylph may also be used in indirect ways, for example creating a cooling breeze, 
scattering dead leaves over a trail or blowing dust into the eyes of enemies.

Combat
A sylph’s primary form of attack is by enveloping and tossing its enemies. It can seize 
and lift a number of victims with a total SIZ equal to or less than the sylph’s STR. 
The victims are thrown two metres (vertically) for every cubic metre of SIZ the sylph 
possesses. Normal falling rules are used to determine damage. If he cannot evade the 
attack, a victim can resist being lifted by a sylph by grabbing hold of a fixed object 
(such as a tree) and matching his Brawn against the sylph’s in a standard opposed test. 
Alternatively, he may try to destroy the sylph through damage before the elemental 
can toss him into the air. A sylph can lift multiple targets by dividing its STR between 
them.

A sylph may also attack by hurling objects at its enemies. In the case of a flying creature, 
for example, picking it up and dropping it is likely to be ineffective. A sylph’s chance 
to hit with a thrown object is always its DEX x 3. Damage is worked out normally 
depending upon the item the sylph hurls.

The following entry is for a sylph of three cubic metres.

SYLPH

1D20 Hit 

AP/HP

Location
Body

1–20

-/20

2

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier +1D8
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

11
20m
+9

Avg
21
—
3 cubic m —
3

Dice
STR
6D6
CON —
SIZ
INT
POW 3D6
DEX
4D6
CHA —

3
11
14
—

Armour: None
Traits: None
Vulnerability: All attacks from earth based elementals, creatures and spells do double damage.
Notable Skills:  42%, Engulf 100%, Persistence 43%, Stealth 75%

68
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Undine
Undines are elementals of the water, their bodies composed of a formless mass of liquid. 
An undine may form in any liquid that is at least 95% water, such as beer, diluted milk 
or diluted wine. 

An undine moves overland like a huge, amorphous amoeba and moves through water 
like a rippling current. There is no difference between undines formed of fresh water 
and salt water.

Abilities
An  undine  can  purify  itself  of  sediment  and  insoluble  substances  by  sitting  and 
churning for a full Combat Round per cubic metre of the elemental. It cannot remove 
dissolved chemicals such as salt or miscible liquids such as alcohol in this way, though 
it could purge itself of dirt or oil. They can also be used to form fountains, make fluids 
flow against gravity – acting like a pump or form stable cavities in volumes of liquid.

An  undine  can  carry  objects  or  beings  if  its  STR  supports  their  SIZ,  or  conversely 
drag them under the surface of a large body of water. Sorcerers capable of summoning 
undines sometimes use them in the place of ships, sitting serenely atop the creature as 
it rushes through the water.

Combat
An undine can engulf 10 SIZ points of a creature for every one cubic metre of volume 
the  elemental  possesses.  An  undine  attacks  by  enveloping  its  victim  and  on  each 
successive Combat Action forcing itself into the victim’s lungs. If the victim fails to 
evade being engulfed, he must succeed in an opposed test of his Resilience verses the 
undine’s Brawn skill, to prevent it forcing itself into his lungs. If he fails, the victim 
cannot  hold  his  breath  and  immediately  begins  to  suffocate.  Even  if  the  undine  is 
unable to force itself into the victim’s lungs, it may still cut its victim off from oxygen, 
though in this case the victim can hold his breath.

An undine may attempt to suffocate water-breathing creatures by drawing oxygen away 
from their gills, a tactic that results in the usual drowning rules. Evading an undine in 
the water requires the use of the Swim skill instead of Evade.

The following entry is for an undine of three cubic metres.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

69

UNDINE

Avg
21
—
3 cubic m —
3

Dice
STR
6D6
CON —
SIZ
INT
POW 3D6
DEX
2D6
CHA —

3
11
7
—

1D20 Hit 

AP/HP

Location
Body

1–20

-/20

2

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier +1D8
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

11
12m
+5

Armour: None
Traits: None
Vulnerability: All attacks from fire based elementals, creatures and spells do double damage.
Notable Skills:  Brawn 42%, Engulf 100%, Persistence 43%, Stealth 45%

Higher Elementals
Higher elementals are the sentient denizens of the Elemental Planes, capable of building 
a  civilization  hidden  from  the  regular  planar  pathways.  While  several  steps  above 
simple elementals, these creatures still reflect their element to the fullest, with all the 
wildness and unpredictability of their lesser cousins. The fact that they are intelligent 
and opinionated makes them even more dangerous.

The  higher  elementals  organise  themselves  into  courts,  bowing  to  their  version  of 
nobility and under the command of the Elemental Rulers (these beings are deliberately 
left vague for Game Masters to describe as best fits their own cosmologies). They are 
aware of the rest of the planes, thanks to the outsiders that have taken residence near 
their homes, and find a way to visit them often, especially the Material Plane.

Combat
Each  elemental  has  its  own  way  of  fighting.  Royal  salamanders  and  gnomides  are 
more likely to jump into melee rather than rely on their allies and magical abilities, 
while  sylphs  and  undines  do  exactly  the  opposite,  relying  on  skill  and  allies  before 
committing to direct combat. In any case, they are rarely found alone, usually being 
together with others of their kind or protected by lesser elementals.

Higher Elemental Traits
All higher elementals posses the following traits.

Alternate Form: Higher elementals can assume a humanoid form at will while visiting 
other planes. This form resembles the elemental’s features in flesh, acting more like a 
suit for Material Plane visits than a disguise. This ability is similar to the shapechange 
spell but allows only one specific humanoid form and higher elementals have access to 

70
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

all of their powers in any of their forms. Details of the forms for each elemental type 
are listed in their descriptions.

Magic  Sense:  This  allows  higher  elementals  to  perceive  the  magical  aura  of  other 
creatures. A successful Perception test reveals the current Magic Points and any extant 
spells or magical effects upon another creature or object.

Poison Immunity: The creature is immune to all poisons.

Additional general traits, primarily combat abilities, are listed below. These additional 
traits need not be restricted to higher elementals; they can also be applied to the various 
other  denizens  of  the  elemental  planes  to  create  a  wide  variety  of  elemental  based 
creatures. Creature specific traits are listed in their entries.

Burn: Those hit by the creatures unarmed attack take an automatic 1d6 extra points 
of fire damage. Creatures hitting the creature with unarmed attacks take fire damage as 
though hit by the creature’s attack.

Extrusion: A metal elemental can extrude a variety of shapes from its body, allowing 
it to choose between any one-handed, close combat weapons. The default weapons are 
a Heavy Mace and a Longsword. Metal elementals can change weapons, as part of any 
action, be it movement or a Combat Action.

Fire Resistant: Creatures with this trait ignore non-magical fire damage.

Flaming Aura: Any creature within close combat range must succeed on a Resilience 
check or suffer 1D6 points of damage to a random Hit Location each round from the 
intense heat.

Flood: Once per round, at the cost of a combat action, when standing near a large 
body of water, the creature can call a large wave that hits everyone standing 20 metres 
from the waterline. The creature stands at the centre of this wave, which reaches 10 
metres to each side. All affected must roll an opposed Athletics test versus the creature’s 
Unarmed skill to maintain their balance. If the opposed test is lost the target falls prone 
and is pushed back 1D12 metres. Standing up requires the creature to succeed on an 
un-opposed Athletics test to regain their balance and costs one Combat Action.
Metal Absorption: Any time a metal elemental is struck or touched by a metal object, 
it can draw said object into its body. It heals a number of Hit Points equal to the AP of 
the item. A creature wielding the object can attempt an opposed Brawn test to avoid 
having the object drawn in.

Natural Invisibility: All Perception tests, except those preceded by a successful casting 
of Detect Elemental (Element)*, to detect the elemental are Hard (-40%). 

Tremor: Once every 1D4 rounds the creature, by expending a Combat Action can 
make the ground tremble beneath them up to 20 metres away. Creatures must make a 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

71

difficult (-20%) Evade test or be knocked prone. The shaking is so violent that creatures 
inside the area that fail their Evade test suffer 1d4 points of damage to a random Hit 
Location. Armour does not reduce this damage.

Water Burst: Once per round at the cost of Combat Action, the creature can shoot a 
powerful stream of water at one enemy standing up to 20 metres away. The burst causes 
3D4 points of damage, and the target must make an Evade check; a successful check 
halves the damage and allows the target to remain standing, otherwise the target falls 
prone and takes full damage.

Wind Slam: Once per round at the cost of Combat Action, the creature can shoot a 
powerful, invisible jet of wind at one enemy standing up to 20 metres away. The slam 
causes 3D4 points of damage, and the target must make an Evade check; a successful 
check halves the damage and allows the target to remain standing, otherwise the target 
falls prone and takes full damage.

New Combat Manoeuvre
Combustion:  Fire  elementals  with  the  Burn  trait  can  elect  to  use  the  Combustion 
combat manoeuvre either offensively or defensively. Opponents must succeed on an 
opposed Evade test versus the fire elementals attack or parry roll or be set on fire. The 
fire burns for 1d4 rounds and is treated as a Large Flame, which deals 1D4 points of 
damage to the struck location each round until extinguished. A burning creature can 
use a Combat Action to put out the flame.

Higher elementals, unlike their base brethren, have variable characteristics for STR, 
SIZ, INT, DEX, POW and CHA. Like their base brethren they have no CON score, 
being creatures composed entirely of elemental matter and are immune to effects that 
require  resilience  rolls. The  table  below  outlines  the  characteristics  for  each  type  of 
higher elemental where X is the number of Magic Points spent on characteristics, for 
example  a  three  Magic  Point  gnomide  would  have  a  STR  score  of  3D6+6.  Games 
Masters are encouraged to set reasonable limits on the number of Magic Points to be 
used for characteristics.

Characteristic
STR
SIZ
INT
DEX
POW
CHA
Hit Points

Gnomide
XD6+6
XD6+6
XD6
XD6
XD6
XD6
XD6+6

Royal Salamander
XD6
XD6
XD6+6
XD6+6
XD6

Sylph
XD6
XD6
XD6
XD6+6
XD6+6

Undine
XD6+6
XD6
XD6
XD6
XD6+6

Similarly to base elementals, higher elementals do not have Hit Locations, only general 
Hit Points. When reduced to zero or less on the material plane their underlying matrix 
dissipates and they return to their native plane unscathed, however, being reduced to 
zero or less on their native plane destroys them completely.

72
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Hit Locations
If you wish to use Hit Locations for Higher Elementals when in humanoid form on the 
material plane use their general Hit Points to calculate the location value. Each of the 
example Higher Elementals below have 17 general Hit Points therefore the Hit Points 
per location would be: Each Leg 4, Abdomen 5, Chest 6, Each Arm 3 and Head 4.

Skills
All  higher  elementals  have  the  advanced  skills  Elemental  Mastery  and  Summon 
Elemental at their total Magic Point cost x 10%. When summoning, a higher elemental 
can  only  summon  a  base  elemental  (or  other  elemental  creature)  with  a  maximum 
Magic Point cost of one-quarter of its remaining Magic Points. Other advanced skills 
and traits are purchased at a cost of one Magic Point per skill or trait. As mentioned 
in the Elemental Summoning chapter, higher elementals common and advanced skills 
are increased from a pool of skill points equal to twice the sorcerers Summon skill. No 
single skill can receive more than three times its base value.

All higher elementals that use sorcery have Elemental Native as their grimoire with spells 
appropriate to that element as noted in the descriptions below. Their Manipulation 
skill is three times their POW plus 10%.

The examples that follow are all seven Magic Point summonings by an elementalist 
with a Summoning skill of 75%.

When immobile, in or against their particular element (standing in front of a rock face 
for a gnomide, or in front of a fire for a royal salamander for example), Stealth checks 
for higher elementals are treated as Easy (+40%).

Gnomide
The civilization builders from the Plane of Earth, gnomides are industrious and reliable, 
accused  rightly  of  stubbornness  as  they  rarely  change  their  mind  once  they  commit 
to anything. They are squat and stocky, with stone skin that ranges from grey to black, 
depending on the kind of rock it is made of. Their features are rough and vague; their faces 
have more suggestions of facial features than the real thing. Gnomides are master crafters, 
taking what comes from the earth and fashioning it into anything, be it metal or stone.

Combat
Gnomides are not known for clever tactics, brutal assault works for them just fine. If 
they use weapons, they are made from the strongest metals and the toughest stone.

Alternate Form: The humanoid form of a gnomide is a dwarf.
Sorcery (Elemental Native): Animate (Earth), Earthquake*, Form/Set (Earth).

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

73

Royal Salamander
Royal  salamanders  consider  themselves  the  ‘true’  salamanders,  looking  at  base 
elementals of the same name as nothing more than servants. Royal salamanders are 
humanoid torches, their clothing made of coloured flame and their words coming out 
with smoke. These elementals have volatile tempers and spend their energy in exquisite 
works of art or in devastating acts of destruction.

Combat
Royal salamanders love to fight and throw themselves into battle with joyous abandon. 
They are quick and strong and prefer unarmed combat to using weapons, as every limb 
is capable of dealing great damage. If losing ground, a royal salamander will back off 
and attack using Elemental Mastery effects.

Alternate Form: The humanoid form of a royal salamander is a human with red or 
coppery blond hair. 

Sorcery (Elemental Native): Animate (Fire), Flame Arrow*, Fire Storm*.

Sylph
These  higher  elementals  are  proof  that  scholarly  pursuits  are  boring  and  stale. The 
sylphs are always in search of new knowledge, be it arcane lore or casual gossip. They 
share all they learn with each other and with others depending on each sylph’s whims. 
Sylphs resemble waifish females, their light-tinted skin tones still discernible in their 
translucent form. They wear long robes made of clouds that trail behind them as they 
fly. They speak in soft whispers and laugh like the rain, but for all their gentleness, their 
patience is a hair’s breadth from infinite, and when exhausted they strike with the force 
of the hurricane.

Combat
Sylphs  prefer  to  talk  before  committing  to  combat  and  attack  from  afar  unless  it 
proves disadvantageous. Excellent tacticians, they work together to complement each 
other with precise efficiency, never letting combat drag on for longer than absolutely 
necessary.

Alternate Form: The humanoid form of a sylph is a human woman with light and 
delicate features.

Sorcery (Elemental Native): Animate (Air), Damage Resistance, Palsy, Whirlwind*.

74
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Undine
Undines  are  an  enigma  given  shape,  their  character  contradictory  for  its  gentleness 
and violence, dedicated to nurturing all forms of life but sometimes wiping out entire 
settlements when angry. They are wise and know the truth behind many mysteries, but 
they are not as free with their knowledge as the sylphs. They also take female form, 
but  they  are  sensuous  and  dark,  moving  with  fluid  grace. Their  bodies  are  slightly 
transparent, refracting the light that falls on them, but their features are still clearly 
distinguishable.

Combat
The fury of an undine fighting is terrifying to behold, as they seek to annihilate anything 
that dares stand in their way. Just after the battle is done, they return to their calm and 
gracious demeanour. They prefer to attack from range, tricking their opponents into 
making mistakes or opening their defences.

Alternate Form: The humanoid form of an undine is a slightly tanned human or elven 
woman with blue-black hair and deep green or blue eyes. Additionally, once per day 
undines can take the shape of a sea serpent with a +6 bonus to SIZ, this transformation 
lasts for an hour. All skills and other attributes based on SIZ are increased appropriately. 

Summon  Elemental:  In  addition  to  the  standard  rules  for  higher  elementals 
summoning base elementals Undines can also summon one ushkya.

Sorcery (Elemental Native): Animate (Water), Drown*, Treat Wounds, Whirlpool* 

Elemental Creatures
Like base and higher elementals, all creatures with word ‘Elemental’ in their statistic 
block  lack  CON  and  are  therefore  immune  to  all  effects  that  require  a  Resistance 
Roll.  Unlike  their  elemental  brethren  however,  their  underlying  elemental  matrix  is 
significantly weaker; they have locational Hit Points based on STR+SIZ rather than 
STR+CON.  When  a  hit  location  is  reduced  to  zero  or  less  on  the  material  plane 
the creature’s elemental matrix dissipates and the creature returns to its home plane 
unharmed, if this occurs on its home plane then the creature is irrevocably destroyed.

Sorcerers  of  the  appropriate  way  can  summon  any  elemental  creature–not  just 
elementals–the Magic Point cost for doing so is the average of the number of dice used 
to calculate its characteristics plus one Magic Point for each Trait and Advanced Skill 
the creature possesses; the Danbach below would therefore cost seven magic points to 
summon.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

75

1D20 Hit 

AP/HP

Location
Body

1–20

6/17

GNOMIDE

Dice
3D6+6

Avg
17
STR
—
CON —
3D6+6 17
SIZ
INT
3D6
POW 3D6
3D6
DEX
3D6 —
CHA

3
11
7

2

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier +1D4
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

11
4m
+4

Armour: Natural. No Armour Penalty
Traits:  Alternate  Form*,  Earth  Sense,  Formidable  Natural  Weapons,  Magic  Sense,  Poison 
Immunity, Tremor*
Vulnerability: All attacks from air based elementals, creatures and spells do double damage.
Notable  Skills:    Athletics  28%,  Brawn  64%,  Evade  42%,  Evaluate  42%,  Influence  22%, 
Perception 37%, Persistence 43%, Stealth 22%, Unarmed 58%
Magical Skills: Elemental Mastery 70%, Summon Elemental 70%

 
Combat Manoeuvre  AP/HP 
Stun Location 

 

 

As for Body 

Weapons 
Type 
Fists 

Size 
M 

 
Reach 
M 

 
 
Damage 
 
1D3+1D4 

Combat Styles:
Unarmed 62%

76
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

ROYAL SALAMANDER

Dice
3D6

3D6
3D6+6

STR
CON —
SIZ
INT
POW 3D6
DEX
CHA

3D6+6
3D6

1D20 Hit 

AP/HP

Location
Body

1–20

3/17

Combat Actions
3
Damage Modifier —
Magic Points
11
Movement
8m
Strike Rank
+17

Avg
11
—
11
17
11
17
11

Armour: Flaming Hide. No Armour Penalty
Traits: Alternate Form*, Breathe Flame (1D8, 1/hour), Burn*, Magic Sense, Poison Immu-
nity
Vulnerability: All attacks from water based elementals, creatures and spells do double damage.
Notable Skills:  Athletics 48%, Evade 54%, Influence 52%, Insight 28%, Perception 43%, 
Persistence 43%, Stealth 34%, Unarmed 58%
Magical  Skills:  Elemental  Mastery  70%,  Manipulation  43%,  Sorcery  (Elemental  Native) 
54%, Summon Elemental 70%
Advanced Skills: Acrobatics 53%
Grimoire (Elemental Native): Animate (Fire), Flame Arrow*, Fire Storm*

Weapons
Type 
Fists 

Size 
M 

Combat Styles:
Unarmed 58%

Reach 
S 

Damage 
 
1D3+1D6 

Combat Manoeuvre  AP/HP
Grip, Combustion  As for Body

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

77

SYLPH, HIGHER

Dice
3D6

3D6
3D6

STR
CON —
SIZ
INT
POW 3D6+6
3D6+6
DEX
CHA
3D6

1D20 Hit 

AP/HP

Location
Body

1–20

2/17

Combat Actions
3
Damage Modifier —
Magic Points
17
Movement
8m 
(20m fly)
+15

Strike Rank

Avg
11
—
11
11
17
17
11

Armour: Natural. No Armour Penalty
Traits: Alternate Form*, Magic Sense, Poison Immunity, Wind Slam*
Vulnerability: All attacks from earth based elementals, creatures and spells do double damage.
Notable  Skills:  Dance 58%, Evade 34%, Influence 28%, Insight 43%, Perception 43%, 
Persistence 61%, Stealth 28%, Unarmed 58%
Magical Skills: Elemental Mastery 70%, Summon Elemental 70%
Advanced Skills: Acrobatics 48%, Lore (Any) 42%, Seduction 42%

Weapons
Type 
Fists 

Size 
M 

Combat Styles
Unarmed 58%

Reach 
S 

Damage  Combat Manoeuvre   
1D3 
 

Stun Location 

AP/HP 
As for Body 

78
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

UNDINE, HIGHER

Dice
3D6+6

3D6
3D6

STR
CON —
SIZ
INT
POW 3D6+6
DEX
CHA

3D6
3D6

1D20 Hit 

AP/HP

Location
Body

1–20

3/17

Avg
17
—
11
11
17
11
11

2

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier +1D2
Magic Points
Movement

17
8m
(20m swim)
+11

Strike Rank

Armour: Natural. No Armour Penalty
Traits: 
Vulnerability: All attacks from fire based elementals, creatures and spells do double damage.
Common Skills: Evade 22%, First Aid 52%, Insight 4
3%, Perception 43%, Persistence 61%, Unarmed 58%
Advanced Skills: Healing 48%
Magical  Skills:  Elemental  Mastery  70%,  Manipulation  61%,  Sorcery  (Elemental  Native) 
42%, Summon (Elemental) 70%
Grimoire (Elemental Native): Animate (Water), Drown*, Treat Wounds, Whirlpool*

Weapons
Type 
Fists 

Size 
M 

Combat Styles:
Unarmed 58%

Reach 
S 

 
Damage 
1D3+1D2 

Combat Manoeuvre  AP/HP
Grip 

As for Body

 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

79

Danbach
Danbach are small, humanoid elementals native to the elemental plane of fire. Whilst 
small,  their  bodies  burn  with  intense  heat  and  they  are  wreathed  in  searing  flames. 
Danbach  are  short  and  stocky,  generally  between  1-1.2  metres  tall,  and  weigh  on 
average 80 kilograms.

Danbach are typically the workers of the elemental plane fire, subservient to the Royal 
Salamanders  who  treat  them  as  little  more  than  slaves,  and  often  charged  with  any 
menial task or labour.

Combat
Danbach  are  not  aggressive  creatures  and  will  usually  run  from  a  fight,  particularly 
against creatures that are immune to fire. However, when backed into a corner they are 
quite formidable and dangerous, against foes with no protection from heat and flames 
they are outright deadly.

Stopar
Stopar  are  creatures  native  to  the  Elemental  Plane  of  Air.  They  sometimes  serve 
sorcerers,  who  summon  them  to  perform  specific  tasks,  usually  involving  spying  or 
assassination.

A  summoned  stopar  undertakes  whatever  task  the  summoner  commands,  even  if 
the  task  sends  it  hundreds  or  thousands  of  kilometres  away. The  creature  follows  a 
command  until  the  task  is  completed  and  obeys  only  the  summoner.  However,  it 
resents  protracted  missions  or  complex  tasks  and  will  do  what  it  can  to  thwart  its 
instructions in such cases.

Stopars have an amorphous form and are naturally invisible. A successful casting of a 
Detect Elemental (Air)* spell shows only a dim outline of a cloud, while a critical casting 
reveals a roiling cloud of vapour.

Combat
A  stopar  attacks  with  its  Gale  Blast,  an  intense  blast  of  wind  that  pounds  a  single 
target within 20 metres of the stopar. To defend against this attack the target must first 
succeed on a Difficult (-20%) Perception test, otherwise the target is unaware of the 
attack and is considered to have automatically rolled a Failure.

A stopar can be killed only when it is on the Elemental Plane of Air. When performing 
a  task  elsewhere,  it  automatically  returns  to  its  home  plane  when  it  takes  damage 
sufficient to reduce its Hit Points to zero or less.

80
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Ushkya
Ushkya are powerful horses made of water that live in the Plane of Water or in the deep 
oceans of the Material Plane, sometimes riding waves into brief forays inland. Their 
bodies have the countenance of a heavy warhorse, but their deep blue and translucent 
bodies give them away as natives of the Plane of Water. Their manes and tails are white 
as foam. Undines use them as mounts when they do not allow them to roam freely. 
They can be captured by sea-dwelling creatures like sea elves and mermen and trained 
as mounts, but the water horse always finds a way to escape.

Combat
Ushkya  are  not  aggressive  but  are  known  to  entice  lonely  travellers  to  ride  them, 
masquerading as a magnificent but otherwise normal horse. If attacked on land, the 
ushkya fights while looking to retreat to the water, where it tries to cripple the attacker 
and run away. It only lets loose its flood ability when facing more than one creature.

TRAITS:
Lure Rider: The ushkya convinces a single creature that it should ride it and then gallops 
inside the water to give the unwary traveller the joyride of his life before returning him 
to shore. This effect can be resisted with a successful opposed Persistence test.

Water  Dependency: The  ushkya  must  remain  in  the  water  or  no  further  than  20 
metres from the waterline. For every hour it spends out of the water the ushkya must 
succeed on a Resilience check or suffer one level of fatigue until it returns to the water.

Affiliated Creatures
The elemental planes are home to many creatures that share an affinity with a particular 
plane,  not  just  elementals.  Most  of  these  creatures  find  their  way  to  the  elemental 
planes  by  accident;  however,  some  of  them  arrive  by  design,  carving  out  their  own 
territories. Usually, unless the interloper poses a threat to the elemental inhabitants, the 
elemental rulers allow these creatures to stay learning as much from them as possible.

Airhawk
An Airhawk is an unusual creature that has found a home on the elemental plane of 
air. Its origins are unknown, however, sylph scholars postulate it may have been bred to 
serve as amount for a race forgotten in antiquity. 

An Airhawk has a sinuous, winged, reptilian body covered in feather-like fur, a barbed 
tail and the head and claws of a monstrous hawk. Its tail is capable of firing a bolt of 
lightning. An average specimen (11 to 40 years old) is about three metres long from 
beak to tail, with a wingspan of about 5 metres and a weight of about 50 kilograms. 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

81

DANBACH

Dice
3D6+6

STR
CON —
4D6
SIZ
INT
2D6
POW 3D6
3D6
DEX
CHA
3D6

Avg
17
—
14
7
11
11
11

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-10
11-12
13-15
16-18
19-20 Head

Hit 
AP/HP
Location
2/7
Right Leg
2/7
Left Leg
2/8
Abdomen
2/9
Chest
Right Arm 2/6
Left Arm 2/6
2/7

2

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier +1D4
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

11
6m 
+9

Armour: Flaming Hide. No Armour Penalty
Traits: Burn, Flaming Aura, Poison Immunity, Night Sight 
Vulnerability: All attacks from water based elementals, creatures and spells do double damage.
Common Skills: Athletics 48%, Brawn 51%, Culture (Own) 44%, Evade 42%, Perception 
48%, Persistence 43%, Unarmed 58%

Damage 
1D3+1D4+1D6  Grip, Combustion  As for Body 

Combat Manoeuvre  AP/HP 

 

Weapons
Type 
Fists 

Size 
M 

Reach 
S 

Combat Styles
Flaming Fist 58%

82
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

STOPAR

Dice
4D8+4

Avg
22
STR
—
CON —
4D8+2 20
SIZ
14
INT
3D8+2
13
POW 2D8+4
18
DEX
CHA —
—

4D8

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-10
11-12
13-15
16-18
19-20 Head

Hit 
AP/HP
Location
2/9
Right Leg
2/9
Left Leg
2/10
Abdomen
2/11
Chest
Right Arm 2/8
Left Arm 2/8
2/9

3

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier +1D8
Magic Points
Movement

13
6m
(20m fly)
+16

Strike Rank

Armour: Natural. No Armour Penalty. 
Traits: Natural Invisibility
Vulnerability: All attacks from earth based elementals, creatures and spells do double damage.
Common Skills: Perception 57%, Persistence 49%, Stealth 92%, Unarmed 70%
Advanced Skills: Track 74%

Weapons
Type 
Gale Blast M 

Size 

Combat Styles:
Gale Blast 70%

Reach 
- 

Damage 
 
1D8+1D8 

Combat Manoeuvre  AP/HP  Range
20m
Stun Location 

- 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

83

USHYKA

Dice
2D6+22

Avg
29
STR
—
CON —
2D6+22 29
SIZ
INT
2D6
POW 3D6
DEX
CHA —

7
11
10
—

2D6+3

AP/HP

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-10
11-12
13-15
16-18
19-20 Head

Hit 
Location
Right Leg —
Left Leg —
Abdomen —
—
Chest
Right Arm —
Left Arm —
—

2

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier +1D10
Magic Points
Movement

11
10m 
(20m swim)
+9

Strike Rank

Armour: Natural. No Armour Penalty
Traits: Flood*, Lure Rider*, Night Sight, Poison Immunity, Water Dependency*.
Vulnerability: All attacks from fire based elementals, creatures and spells do double damage.
Common Skills: Athletics 80%, Brawn 50%, Evade 30%, Persistence 43%, Stealth 42%, 
Unarmed 60%

Combat Manoeuvre  AP/HP 
- 

As for Leg 

 

Weapons
Type 
Hooves  L 

Size 

Combat Styles
Kick 60%

Reach 
M 

 
Damage 
1D6+1D10 

84
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

AIRHAWK

Dice
Avg
STR
4D6+3 17
CON 4D6+3 17
SIZ
4D6+3 17
11
INT
11
11
POW 3D6
DEX 6D6
21

Hit 
Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Body
Breast
Tail

AP/HP
1D20
3/7
1-3
3/7
4-6
3/8
7-8
3/9
9-11
3/7
12
13-15 Right Wing 3/6
3/6
16-18 Left Wing
19-20 Head
3/7

3

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier +1D4
Magic Points
Movement

11
6m
(20m fly)
+16

Strike Rank

Armour: Thick hide. No Armour Penalty. 
Traits: Flying
Vulnerability: All attacks from earth based elementals, creatures and spells do double damage.
Common  Skills:  Brawn  64%,  Evade  72%,  Perception  82%,  Persistence  43%,  Resilience 
61%, Stealth 72%, Unarmed 48%

Weapons
Size 
Type 
M 
Bite 
Claw 
M 
Lightning  M 

Reach 
S 
S 
- 

 
Damage 
1D4+1D4   
1D8+1D4   
2D8+1D4   

Combat Manoeuvre 
Bleed 
Impale 
- 

 
 
 

AP/HP 
As for Head 
As for Leg   
Range: 20m

Combat Styles:
Tooth and Nail 68%, Lightning 72%

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

85

Combat
Airhawks are extremely territorial and always hungry. They attack almost any other 
creature they meet, seeking a meal or trying to drive away a rival. The primary mode 
of attack is a bolt of lightning, fired from the tail. The bolt can be fired once per round 
as a Combat Action. As with any ranged attack, the target can Evade, however, Evade 
tests for targets wearing metal armour, using metal shields or weapons is Difficult (-20). 
The bolt cannot be parried. Natural and worn armour offers no protection from the 
bolts damage but magical protection does. An Airhawk can also attack with its beak 
and claws but it prefers to stay out of reach.

Giants
Various races of giants have found homes on the elemental planes. The elemental rulers 
tend  to  leave  them  alone  as  for  the  most  part  they  pose  little  threat  to  their  rule. 
Where they came from originally and why remains a mystery. Some say the majority 
of them are wanderers; fleeing from persecution on their home planes. Others, that 
due to the affinity these giants have with particular elements, certain members of each 
species were relocated to preserve their race. Whether that relocation was by divine 
intervention or by their own actions no one knows. 

Giants are unsubtle when it comes to a fight and relish melee combat. They favour 
massive two-handed weapons and wield them with impressive skill. They have enough 
cunning to soften up a foe with ranged attacks first, if they can. A giant’s favourite 
ranged weapon is a big rock.
Adult giants are accomplished rock throwers and can hurl rocks weighing up to twice 
their STR score in kilograms with ease. The effective range for a thrown rock is one 
half the giants CON score.

Rock Catching: A giant can catch rocks of a size he can throw (or projectiles of similar 
shape and size).
Once per round, a giant that would normally be hit by a rock can make an opposed 
Evade  test  to  catch  it.  If  he  gains  a  level  of  success  over  his  opponent  he  may 
immediately  throw  it  back  at  the  cost  of  a  Combat  Action,  much  like  the  Riposte 
Combat Manoeuvre. A giant cannot catch a rock he has just thrown. The giant must 
be ready for and aware of the attack in order to make a rock catching attempt.

Earth Giants
Earth giants prefer thick leather garments, dyed in shades of brown and grey to match 
the stone around them. An average earth giant is four metres tall. 

Combat
Earth giants fight from a distance whenever possible, but if they can’t avoid melee, they 
use gigantic clubs chiselled out of stone. A favourite tactic of earth giants is to stand 
nearly motionless, blending in with the background, then move forward to throw rocks 
and surprise their foes.

86
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Skills: A stone giant treats Stealth tests as Easy (+40%) when standing immobile in 
rocky terrain.

Earth Giant Elders
Earth giant elders often have learnt a smattering of magic over the course of their long 
lives. 

Typical  Common  Magic  spells  are;  Bludgeon,  Detect  (Substance,  usually  precious 
stones and metals), Endurance, Mason’s Boon, Strength.

Sorcery is very rare among earth giants; however, occasionally there are those learn the 
Art, albeit with a limited grimoire.

Sorcery  (Earth  Mother):  Animate  (Earth),  Damage  Enhancement,  Form/Set  Earth, 
Palsy.

Elder’s magical skills are typically no more than three times their base value.

Flame Giants
Flame giants have bright orange hair. An average adult male is four metres tall with a 
barrel-like chest.
Flame giants wear sturdy cloth or leather garments coloured red, orange, yellow, or 
black. Warriors are covered head-to-toe in blackened steel plate armour. Female flame 
giants are generally shorter and lighter (-6 SIZ) but no less fierce in battle. The statistics 
below are for a flame giant warrior.

Combat
Flame giants heat their rocks in a nearby fire, geyser, or lava pools, so that they deal 
extra  fire  damage.  They  favour  huge,  Fireblade  enhanced  (included  below)  Great 
swords in melee. They are also fond of grabbing smaller opponents and tossing them 
somewhere very hot.

Ice Giant
An ice giant’s hair can be light blue or dirty yellow, and its eyes usually match its hair 
colour. Ice giants dress in skins and pelts, along with any jewellery they own. Ice giant 
warriors add chain coats and metal helmets decorated with horns or feathers.

An average adult male is five metres tall and of muscular build. Females are slightly 
shorter and lighter (-6 SIZ) than males but are otherwise identical. 

Combat
Ice  giants  usually  start  combat  at  a  distance,  throwing  rocks  until  they  run  out  of 
ammunition or the opponent closes, then wading in with their enormous battle-axes. 
They are much more barbaric than their kin and certainly more hostile.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

87

A favourite tactic is to lay an ambush by hiding buried in the snow at the top of an icy 
or snowy slope, where opponents will have difficulty reaching them.

Ice giants keep tundra wolves as pets and often use them when hunting.

Tundra Wolf
Bred  in  ages  past  from  regular  wolves,  the  method  now  lost  to  time,  by  ice  giants 
as hunting partners and companions, tundra wolves are bigger, tougher and meaner 
versions of standard wolves. They average one and a half metres in length, stand at one 
and a half metres tall at the shoulder and weigh in excess of 80 kilograms.

Combat
Tundra  wolves  typically  hunt  in  packs. Their  size,  cunning,  and  formidable  breath 
weapon allow them to hunt and kill creatures much larger than themselves. A pack 
usually circles an opponent, each wolf attacking in turn to exhaust it. If they’re in a 
hurry, tundra wolves try to trip their foes.

Breathe Frost: Functions as per the Breathe Flame trait in Monsters of Legend except 
the damage is cold damage rather than fire. A tundra wolfs Breathe Frost ability deals 
1D8 damage and is usable once every 1D4 rounds.

Freezing Bite: A winter wolf deals 1D4 points of additional cold damage every time 
it bites an opponent.

Skills: Due to their natural colouration tundra wolves treat Stealth tests as Easy (+40%) 
in areas of ice and snow. A tundra wolf treats opposed Perception tests against creatures 
it has been tracking as Simple (+20%). 

Cloud Giants
Cloud giants’ skin ranges in colour from milky white to light sky blue. Their hair is 
silvery white or brass, and their eyes are iridescent blue. Adult males average six metres 
in height, with females being slightly smaller (-6 SIZ)

Cloud  giants  dress  in  the  finest  clothing  available  and  wear  jewellery.  To  many, 
appearance  indicates  station: The  better  the  clothes  and  the  finer  the  jewellery,  the 
more important the wearer. They also appreciate music, and most can play one or more 
instruments (the harp is a favourite).

Combat
Cloud giants fight in well-organized units, using carefully developed battle plans. They 
prefer to fight from a position above their opponents. A favourite tactic is to circle the 
enemies, barraging them with rocks while the giants with magical abilities confound 
them with spells. The statistic block below for is an average cloud giant with no magical 
ability.

88
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

EARTH GIANT

Avg

Dice
STR
6D6+22 43
CON 4D6+22 36
6D6+22 43
SIZ
INT
3D6
11
11
POW 3D6
14
DEX 3D6+3
CHA 2D6
7

1D20 Hit 

AP/HP

Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen

4/16
1-3
4/16
4-6
4/17
7-10
4/18
11-12 Chest
13-15 Right Arm 4/15
4/15
16-18 Left Arm
19-20 Head
4/16

2

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier +2D10
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

11
8m
+13

Armour: Thick skin. No Armour Penalty. 
Traits: Earth Sense, Formidable Natural Weapons, Rock Catching
Vulnerability: All attacks from air based elementals, creatures and spells do double damage.
Common  Skills:  Athletics  87%,  Brawn  116%,  Evade  58%,  Persistence  43%,  Resilience 
118%, Unarmed 87%

Weapons
Size 
Type 
Fists 
L 
Rocks  H 
   Range: 18m

Reach 
L 
- 

 
Damage 
1D8+2D10 
2D6+2D10 

Combat Manoeuvre  AP/HP 
Stun Location 
Stun Location 

 
As for Arm
10/40 
 

Combat Styles:
Smash (Fists) 87%, Catch This (Thrown Rocks) 58%

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

89

FLAME GIANT

Dice
Avg
STR
6D6+22 43
CON 4D6+22 36
6D6+22 43
SIZ
INT
3D6
11
11
POW 3D6
14
DEX 3D6+3
CHA 3D6
11

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-10
11-12
13-15
16-18
19-20 Head

Hit 
AP/HP
Location
6/16
Right Leg
6/16
Left Leg
6/17
Abdomen
6/18
Chest
Right Arm 6/15
Left Arm 6/15
6/16

2

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier +2D10
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

11
12m
+7

Armour: Plate, Helm, Breastplate, Vambraces and Greaves. -6 Armour Penalty
Traits: Fire Resistant*, Formidable Natural Weapons, Rock Catching
Vulnerability: All attacks from water based elementals, creatures and spells do double damage.
Common  Skills:  Athletics  87%,  Brawn  86%,  Culture  (Own)  52%,  Evade  58%,  Lore 
(Regional) 52%, Perception 52%, Persistence 43%, Resilience 118%, Unarmed 87%
Magical Skills: Common Magic 66%, Fireblade

Weapons
Size 
Type 
Fists 
H 
Rocks  H 
   Range: 18m

Reach 
VL 
- 

 

Damage 
Combat Manoeuvre   
2D10+2D10+1D6  Bleed, Impale, Sunder 
2D6+2D10+1D6  Stun Location 
 

AP/HP 
6/10
10/40 

Combat Styles
Flaming Great sword 87%, Catch This (Thrown Rocks) 58%

90
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

ICE GIANT

Dice
Avg
STR
7D6+22 47
CON 5D6+22 40
7D6+22 47
SIZ
INT
3D6
11
11
POW 3D6
10
DEX
CHA 3D6
11

2D6+3

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-10
11-12
13-15
16-18
19-20 Head

Hit 
AP/HP
Location
2/20
Right Leg
2/20
Left Leg
5/21
Abdomen
5/22
Chest
Right Arm 5/19
Left Arm 5/19
6/18

2

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier +2D12
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

11
12m
+11

Armour: Leather Trews, Chainmail Coat and Plate Helm. -4 Armour Penalty
Traits: Formidable Natural Weapons
Vulnerability: All attacks from fire based elementals, creatures and spells do double damage.
Common Skills: Athletics 87%, Brawn 94%, Culture (Own) 52%, Evade 20%, Lore 
(Regional) 52%, Perception 52%, Persistence 43%, Resilience 130%, Stealth 51%, 
Unarmed 87%

Reach 
VL 
- 

 

Combat Manoeuvre   
Damage 
 
1D12+2+2D12 
Bleed, Sunder 
2D6+2D10+1D6  Stun Location 
 

AP/HP 
4/10
10/40 

Size 

Weapons
Type 
Great Axe H 
Rocks  H 
   Range: 18m

Combat Styles
Kick 60%

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

91

TUNDRA WOLF

Dice
STR
3D6+3
CON 3D6+6
SIZ
2D6+6
INT
9
POW 3D6
DEX

3D6+3

Avg
15
17
13
9
11
14

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-10
11-12
13-15
16-18
19-20 Head

Hit 
AP/HP
Location
3/7
Right Leg
3/7
Left Leg
3/8
Abdomen
3/9
Chest
Right Arm 3/6
Left Arm 3/6
3/7

2

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier +1D2
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

11
10m
+12

Armour: Fur, Hide. No Armour Penalty
Traits: Breathe Frost (1D8, 1D4 rounds), Freezing Bite, Night Sight
Vulnerability: All attacks from fire based elementals, creatures and spells do double damage.
Common Skills: Athletics 88%, Evade 68%, Perception 75%, Persistence 43%, Resilience 
61%, Stealth 83%, Unarmed 78%

Combat Manoeuvre

Damage
1D8+1D2+1D4 Bleed, Trip Opponent
2D4+1D2

Bleed

AP/HP
As Head
As Legs

Weapons
Size
Type
Bite
M
2 x Claws M

Combat Styles
Fang & Claw 78%

Reach
T
M

92
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

CLOUD GIANT

Dice
Avg
STR
9D6+22 54
CON 6D6+22 43
9D6+22 54
SIZ
INT
3D6
11
11
POW 3D6
17
DEX 3D6+6
CHA 3D6+6
17

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-10
11-12
13-15
16-18
19-20 Head

Hit 
AP/HP
Location
4/20
Right Leg
4/20
Left Leg
4/21
Abdomen
4/22
Chest
Right Arm 4/19
Left Arm 4/19
4/18

3

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier +2D12
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

11
12m
+14

Armour: Tough Hide
Traits: Formidable Natural Weapons, Rock Catching
Vulnerability: All attacks from earth based elementals, creatures and spells do double damage. 
Common  Skills:  Athletics  71%,  Brawn  138%,  Culture  (Own)  52%,  Evade  64%,  Lore 
(Regional) 52%, Perception 52%, Persistence 43%, Resilience 139%, Unarmed 101%
Advanced Skills: Play Instrument 64%

Weapons
Type
Huge Morningstar H
Rocks
H
    Range: 18m

Size

Reach
VL

Damage
2D8+2D12
2D6+2D12

Combat Manoeuvre
Stun Location
Stun Location

AP/HP
4/10
10/40

Combat Styles
Bash (Huge Morningstar) 101%, Catch This (Thrown Rocks) 64%

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

93

Common Magic is the prevalent form of magic used by cloud giants and is generally 
used only by clan leaders and elders. Sorcery is rare and strictly the purview of an elder 
who only teaches it only to mature offspring.

Common Magic typically 54%: Befuddle, Demoralise, Frostbite.
Sorcery  (Clan  Magic)  typically  66%:  Animate  (Air),  Diminish  (INT),  Hinder, 
Holdfast, Tap (INT), Manipulation (typically) 66%. 

Chinese Elementals
Chinese mythology does not have a place for the element of air, but does incorporate 
two other elements in addition to earth, fire and water. These are metal and wood. For 
games with a Chinese or pseudo-Chinese setting, use earth, fire and water elementals 
as described above along with the new metal and wood elementals, known as Ferrans’ 
and Arborans’ respectively, presented below.

Ferran
Metal elementals are the embodiment of metal, with all the strength and flexibility of 
that element. Most seem to be made from liquid iron or steel, since these are the most 
common metals in use by humanity (and the appearance and form of an elemental 
are  always  to  some  extent  shaped  by  the  expectations  of  the  observer),  though  in 
some regions brass or bronze versions are also found. In any case, all metal elementals 
are  capable  of  absorbing  all  types  of  metal,  whatever  they  appear  to  be  made  from 
themselves.

Combat
Metal elementals wade into combat with enthusiasm, slicing, smashing and stabbing 
their foes while trusting to their supernaturally tough metal bodies to shrug off or even 
absorb most attacks. They prefer to wield two weapons, usually a Heavy Mace and 
Longsword (see Extrusion below).

Alternate Form: The humanoid form of a ferran is a human in full plate armour.

Aboran
Wood elementals are made from living wood. They resemble trees, though no specific 
earthly  variety;  a  successful  Lore  (Flora  or  Nature)  test,  for  non-elementalists,  adds 
it critical value to Perception tests (see below under Skills). They are the only higher 
elemental not to have the Alternate Form trait.

Combat
Wood elementals will advance to melee range as rapidly as possible (which is not very 
rapidly, given their movement speed), making full use of their powerful close-range 
attacks. They often employ ambush tactics, standing stock-still as though trees, waiting 
for their unsuspecting foes to pass by.

94
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

FERRAN

Dice
3D6+6

STR
CON —
3D6
SIZ
INT
3D6
POW 3D6
DEX
CHA

3D6+6
3D6

1D20 Hit 

AP/HP

Location
Body

1–20

6/17

Avg
17
—
11
11
11
17
11

4

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier +1D2
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

11
6m
+14

Armour: Metal Body, No Armour Penalty
Traits: Alternate Form*, Extrusion*, Magic Sense, Metal Absorption*, Poison Immunity 
Common Skills: Brawn 58%, Evaluate 52%, Perception 52%, Persistence 43%, Unarmed 
64%
Advanced Skills: Craft (Weaponsmith) 58%, Elemental Mastery 70%, Engineering 52%, 
Summon Elemental 70% 

Weapons
Type
Heavy Mace (1H) L
Longsword (1H) M

Size

Reach Damage
L
L

1D8+1+1D2
1D8+1D2

Combat Manoeuvre
Stun Location, Sunder
Bleed, Impale

AP/HP
As Body
As Body

Combat Styles:
Double Trouble (2 x Close Combat Weapons) 64%

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

95

ARBORAN

Dice
3D6

Avg
11
—
3D6+6 17
11
3D6
17
11
11

STR
CON —
SIZ
INT
POW 3D6+6
DEX
CHA

3D6
3D6

1D20 Hit 

AP/HP

Location
Body

1–20

3/17

2

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier +1D2
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

17
6m
+11

Armour: Wooden Body, No Armour Penalty
Traits: Magic Sense, Poison Immunity, Rooted, Splinters
Vulnerability: All attacks from fire based elementals, creatures and spells do double damage.
Common Skills: Brawn 58%, Insight 58%, Perception 58%, Persistence 61%, Unarmed 
66%
Advanced Skills: Disguise 52%, Elemental Mastery 70%, Summon Elemental 70% 

Weapons
Type
Branch M

Size

Combat Styles:
Branch Slam 66%

Reach
L

Damage
1D8+1D2

Combat Manoeuvre
Impale

AP/HP
As for Body

96
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Splinters:  A  successful  attack  by  an  arboran  leaves  splinters  in  the  wound.  If  the 
arborans’ success level grants it a Combat Manoeuvre, the splinters are large enough 
to Impale the target. Treat the splinters as one size category smaller than the arborans’ 
branch  to  calculate  the  skill  penalty,  in  the  example  below,  the  splinters  would  be 
considered small and inflict a 10% skill penalty.

Rooted: Instead of moving in a round a wood elemental may root itself in the ground, 
or uproot itself. It may do this an unlimited number of times per day. A rooted wood 
elemental is immune to the effects of Bash Opponent and all knockback effects as if it 
were using the Standfast Combat Manoeuvre. Furthermore, Armour Points increase to 
six. A rooted wood elemental may not move. 

Sun Regeneration: In direct natural sunlight a rooted arboran regenerates three Hit 
Points to all locations per round. 

Skills:  A wood elemental treats Stealth tests and Disguise tests, if disguised as tree, 
as Easy (+40%) when in any forest or wooded area. If rooted (see above) these tests 
become Very Easy (+60%).

Aztec Elementals
The Aztec elementals of earth and air have the below trait in common.

Astral Travel: An earth jaguar or wind serpent can travel to the astral plane or return 
to  the  elemental  plane  of  earth  up  to  five  times  per  day.  Doing  so  is  a  full-round 
manoeuvre.

Earth Jaguar
These  large,  stony-bodied  cats  are  about  four  metres  long  and  weigh  around  400 
kilograms. They roam the elemental plane of earth, hunting and destroying smaller 
earth  elementals  and  travellers  for  sport  rather  than  for  food.  In  this  role,  they  act 
somewhat  like  an  ‘immune  system’  and  ‘recycling  system’  rolled  into  one,  for  the 
benefit of the greater good of the plane; effectively, they break down matter into its 
smallest possible components, so it can be absorbed into the raw material of the plane, 
even if it did not originate there. 

Earth jaguars traditionally also roam the astral plane, close to the elemental plane of 
earth.  Here  they  search  for  the  souls  of  the  dead,  travelling  on  their  way  from  the 
material plane to their final resting place. They drain and eventually steal these souls, 
for their own secretive magical purposes or to pass on to their superiors.

Earth jaguars regard themselves as on a par with the noblest of all earth elementals, 
though most dwell outside the cities of the elemental plane of earth, preferring the 
great stony wildernesses and deep rocky veins of that place. In terms of temperament, 
they share most of the qualities of other earth elementals, including patience and greed. 

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

97

These latter two qualities can make them both effective and efficient hunters. As with 
any other cat, an earth jaguar that catches its prey may well toy with it, once it is sure 
the prey is sufficiently subjugated or otherwise defeated. This might afford travellers 
a chance to petition the earth jaguar to take them to their king for judgement, rather 
than destroying them outright. Earth jaguars value gems and precious metals, and so 
an earth jaguar found in its home may at the Games Master’s discretion have a horde 
of such treasure equivalent in value to its POW x 1000 Gold Crowns. 

At  the  Games  Master’s  discretion,  a  sorcerer  may  summon  an  earth  jaguar  in  place 
of a gnomide (albeit at higher Magic Point cost) subject to the rules for summoning. 
It  is  more  than  likely  a  sorcerer  will  have  to  prove  his  worth  by  first  performing  a 
great service for the benefit of the earth jaguars before they will allow themselves to be 
summoned. 

Combat
Earth jaguars do not attack with a pounce, as do their more mundane counterparts, but 
with a highly controlled yet bull-like charge. Often an earth jaguar will burst out from 
the earth to make this charging attack.

Earth Glide: An earth jaguar can glide through stone, dirt, or almost any other sort of 
earth except metal as easily as a fish swims through water. Its burrowing leaves behind 
no tunnel or hole, nor does it create any ripple or other signs of its presence.

Rake: When an earth jaguar grips with its bite attack it may attempt to rake the victim 
on its next Combat Action. It makes an attack with its claws, which if successful, does 
an extra 2D6 damage. A rake attack cannot be parried as the earth jaguar has closed 
with its opponent, refer the Weapon Reach – Closing and Disengaging rules in the 
Legend Core Rulebook.

Rushing Charge: If an earth jaguar charges a foe and hits with its bite attack it gains an 
immediate, additional Combat Action which it uses to make a Rake attack. 

Soul Stealer: If an earth jaguar establishes a hold, it can attempt to draw out its target’s 
very soul. This attack has no effect on creatures that do not have a soul distinct from 
their body (including elementals). This attack drains one point of the victims POW for 
every 10% of the earth jaguars Bite skill. The POW drain continues until the victim 
is either; dead (POW drops to zero or below), breaks free with an opposed Athletics, 
Brawn or Unarmed test or resists with a successful opposed Persistence test each round 
the grip is maintained. 

98
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Skills: Earth jaguars, like most predatory cats, are innately stealthy; this is reflected 
in their high Stealth skill. Due to their familiarity with their environment, whilst on 
the elemental plane of earth, they treat all Perception and Stealth tests as Easy (+40%) 
checks  while  on  the  elemental  plane  of  earth.  Earth  jaguars  treat  Athletics  tests  for 
balancing and climbing as Simple (+20).

Wind Serpents
Wind serpents are powerful, servants of fate from the elemental plane of air. Charged 
with certain crucial magical tasks with regard to humanity, they are both life-bringers 
and death-bringers, always acting according to the predestined fates revealed to them 
before the world began. Whatever a wind serpent does, it is for a specific purpose. 

Wind serpents are normally 10 metres in length. 

At the Games Master’s discretion, a sorcerer may summon a wind serpent in place of a 
sylph (albeit at higher Magic Point cost) subject to the rules for summoning. It is more 
than likely a sorcerer will have to prove his worth by first performing a great service 
for the benefit of the wind serpents before they will allow themselves to be summoned. 

The wind serpent god-king, Ehecatl, is said to have been the first life-giver, the creator 
of  all  living  things  on  the  material  plane,  before  returning  to  his  windy  home  on 
the elemental plane of air. He also destroyed humanity and the material plane once, 
blowing the land apart with great hurricanes and transforming the surviving humans 
into monkeys. 

Combat
Wind serpents are not particularly aggressive, but will fight with everything at their 
disposal if forced into combat. They will devote time to healing any allies if necessary, 
even at the cost of injury to themselves. Any wind serpent that believes it is its day to 
die will sacrifice itself for a greater cause if need be. 

Breath of Life: A wind serpent may as a full-round manoeuvre breathe life into the 
mouth and nose of any creature. This heals 1D4 damage per 10% of the wind serpents 
Healing Skill. The wind serpent may do this up to seven times per day. 

Tail  Lash:  A  wind  serpent  that  hits  with  its  tail  deals  an  additional  2D6  electrical 
damage. Creatures affected by the electrical damage are also stunned for 1D4 rounds. 
A successful opposed Resilience test versus the wind serpents attack roll negates the 
stunning effect.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

99

EARTH JAGUAR

Dice
3D6+12

3D6+18
8

STR
CON —
SIZ
INT
POW 3D6+3
DEX 3D6+12
CHA —

Avg
23
—
29
8
14
23
—

Right Hind Leg
Left Hind Leg
Hindquarters
Forequarters

1D20 Hit Location
1-3
4-6
7-9
10-12
13-15 Right Front Leg
16-18
19-20 Head

Left Front Leg

AP/HP
6/11
6/11
6/12
6/13
6/10
6/10
6/11

2

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier +1D2
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

11
10m
+12

Armour: Stone, No Armour Penalty
Traits: Astral Travel, Earth Glide, Rake, Rushing Charge, Soul Stealer 
Vulnerability: All attacks from air based elementals, creatures and spells do double damage.
Common Skills: Athletics 66%, Brawn 72%, Evade 66%, Perception 22%, Persistence 52%, 
Stealth 71%, Unarmed 76%
Advanced Skills: Survival 44%, Track 68%

Weapons
Type
Bite
2 x Claws

Size
L
L

Reach
T
T

Damage
1D8+1D12
2D6+1D12

Combat Manoeuvre
Grip 
Bleed

AP/HP
As for Head
As for Front Leg

Combat Styles
Stealthy Hunter (Bite & Claws) 76%

100
Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

WIND SERPENT

Dice
3D6

Avg
STR
11
CON —
—
SIZ
3D6+12 23
INT
3D6+6
17
POW 3D6+18 29
3D6+12 23
DEX
CHA —
—

Hit 
Location
Tail
Abdomen
Chest

1D20
AP/HP
1-4
0/7
5-8
0/8
9-12
0/9
13-14 Right Wing 0/6
0/6
15-16 Left Wing
17-20 Head
0/7

4

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier +1D4
Magic Points
Movement

29
8m
(20m fly)
+20

Strike Rank

Armour: No Armour Penalty
Traits: Astral Travel, Breath of Life, Magic Sense, Poison Immunity, Tail Lash, Wind Slam
Vulnerability: All attacks from earth based elementals, creatures and spells do double damage.
Common Skills: First Aid 70, Influence 30%, Insight 76%, Perception 46%, Persistence 
97%, Unarmed 66%
Magical Skills: Manipulation 97%, Sorcery (Ehecatls’ Chosen) 70%
Grimoire (Ehecatls’ Chosen): Animate (Air), Damage Resistance, Dominate (Human), 
Neutralise Magic, Palsy, Restoration, Treat Wounds, Whirlwind*.

Weapons
Type
Tail

Size
L

Reach
L

Damage
2D6+3+1D4+2D6 —

Combat Manoeuvre

AP/HP
As for Tail

Combat Styles
Tail Lash 64%, Wind Slam 76%

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

101

102Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

Legend & Open Content

Here at Mongoose Publishing, we want what we truly believe to be one of the best fantasy 
RPGs on the market to be easy to use and modify.  We have therefore made this rulebook 

Open Content, in conjunction with the Open Game Licence.  

All the text of this book is designated as Open Content – this means you are free to use 

the Open Game Licence (overleaf) to reproduce this text and build upon it with your own 
scenarios and mechanics. You can even print and sell such work, if that is your desire (and we 

would wish you the very best of luck if you choose to do this!).

By using the Open Content of this book, you also have permission to download the Legend 

Compatible logo from our web site (on the Legend product pages), and use that on any Legend 

work you publish, to demonstrate your material is part of the wider Legend family.

Please note that the artwork in this book is not Open Content.

All books in the core Legend range (those whose titles have the word ‘Legend’ in them) 

will also be designated as Open Content, allowing you to expand your own games in many 

different directions, while maintaining a solid root that everyone will be familiar with.

For example, you might be using Legend to produce your own gaming world. If you wanted 
to add some high seas action, you can simply and quickly bring over the Open Content rules 
we produce in, say, Pirates of Legend, knowing that everyone who plays Legend will at least be 

familiar with those rules.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

OPEN GAME LICENSE Version 1.0a 
The following text is the property of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. and is Copyright 2000 Wizards of the Coast, Inc 
(‘Wizards’). All Rights Reserved. 
1. Definitions: (a)’Contributors’ means the copyright and/or trademark owners who have contributed Open Game 
Content; (b)’Derivative Material’ means copyrighted material including derivative works and translations (including 
into  other  computer  languages),  potation,  modification,  correction,  addition,  extension,  upgrade,  improvement, 
compilation,  abridgment  or  other  form  in  which  an  existing  work  may  be  recast,  transformed  or  adapted;  (c) 
‘Distribute’ means to reproduce, license, rent, lease, sell, broadcast, publicly display, transmit or otherwise distribute; 
(d)’Open Game Content’ means the game mechanic and includes the methods, procedures, processes and routines 
to  the  extent  such  content  does  not  embody  the  Product  Identity  and  is  an  enhancement  over  the  prior  art  and 
any additional content clearly identified as Open Game Content by the Contributor, and means any work covered 
by  this  License,  including  translations  and  derivative  works  under  copyright  law,  but  specifically  excludes  Product 
Identity. (e) ‘Product Identity’ means product and product line names, logos and identifying marks including trade 
dress; artifacts; creatures characters; stories, storylines, plots, thematic elements, dialogue, incidents, language, artwork, 
symbols, designs, depictions, likenesses, formats, poses, concepts, themes and graphic, photographic and other visual 
or audio representations; names and descriptions of characters, spells, enchantments, personalities, teams, personas, 
likenesses and special abilities; places, locations, environments, creatures, equipment, magical or supernatural abilities 
or effects, logos, symbols, or graphic designs; and any other trademark or registered trademark clearly identified as 
Product identity by the owner of the Product Identity, and which specifically excludes the Open Game Content; (f) 
‘Trademark’ means the logos, names, mark, sign, motto, designs that are used by a Contributor to identify itself or its 
products or the associated products contributed to the Open Game License by the Contributor (g) ‘Use’, ‘Used’ or 
‘Using’ means to use, Distribute, copy, edit, format, modify, translate and otherwise create Derivative Material of Open 
Game Content. (h) ‘You’ or ‘Your’ means the licensee in terms of this agreement. 
2. The License: This License applies to any Open Game Content that contains a notice indicating that the Open Game 
Content may only be Used under and in terms of this License. You must affix such a notice to any Open Game Content 
that you Use. No terms may be added to or subtracted from this License except as described by the License itself. No 
other terms or conditions may be applied to any Open Game Content distributed using this License. 
3. Offer and Acceptance: By Using the Open Game Content You indicate Your acceptance of the terms of this License. 
4. Grant and Consideration: In consideration for agreeing to use this License, the Contributors grant You a perpetual, 
worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive license with the exact terms of this License to Use, the Open Game Content. 
5.  Representation  of  Authority  to  Contribute:  If  You  are  contributing  original  material  as  Open  Game  Content, 
You represent that Your Contributions are Your original creation and/or You have sufficient rights to grant the rights 
conveyed by this License. 
6. Notice of License Copyright: You must update the COPYRIGHT NOTICE portion of this License to include the 
exact text of the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any Open Game Content You are copying, modifying or distributing, 
and You must add the title, the copyright date, and the copyright holder’s name to the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any 
original Open Game Content you Distribute. 
7. Use of Product Identity: You agree not to Use any Product Identity, including as an indication as to compatibility, 
except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of each element of that Product Identity. 
You agree not to indicate compatibility or co-adaptability with any Trademark or Registered Trademark in conjunction 
with a work containing Open Game Content except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with 
the owner of such Trademark or Registered Trademark. The use of any Product Identity in Open Game Content does 
not constitute a challenge to the ownership of that Product Identity. The owner of any Product Identity used in Open 
Game Content shall retain all rights, title and interest in and to that Product Identity. 
8. Identification: If you distribute Open Game Content You must clearly indicate which portions of the work that you 
are distributing are Open Game Content. 
9. Updating the License: Wizards or its designated Agents may publish updated versions of this License. You may use 
any authorised version of this License to copy, modify and distribute any Open Game Content originally distributed 
under any version of this License. 
10. Copy of this License: You MUST include a copy of this License with every copy of the Open Game Content You 
Distribute. 
11. Use of Contributor Credits: You may not market or advertise the Open Game Content using the name of any 
Contributor unless You have written permission from the Contributor to do so. 
12. Inability to Comply: If it is impossible for You to comply with any of the terms of this License with respect to some 
or all of the Open Game Content due to statute, judicial order, or governmental regulation then You may not Use any 
Open Game Material so affected. 
13. Termination: This License will terminate automatically if You fail to comply with all terms herein and fail to cure 
such breach within 30 days of becoming aware of the breach. All sublicenses shall survive the termination of this 
License. 
14. Reformation: If any provision of this License is held to be unenforceable, such provision shall be reformed only to 
the extent necessary to make it enforceable. 
15. COPYRIGHT NOTICE 
Open Game License v 1.0a Copyright 2000, Wizards of the Coast, Inc. 
Legend Core Rulebook, Copyright 2011, Mongoose Publishing Ltd
Arcania of Legend: Blood Magic, Copyright 2012, Mongoose Publishing Ltd

Elementalism

Jeremy Bauerle (order #6303863)

2014,

