Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

gladiators of

LEGEND

Credits 	

Contents

Original Author

Introduction	

2

Overview of the Arena	

6

Races of the Spectacle	

14

The Arenas	

18

Alexander Fennell

The Gladiator Campaign	

38

Layout

Characters of the Arena	

42

Gladiatorial Combat	

45

Fame, Mercy & the Crowd	

58

Chariots	

61

Exotic Weaponry	

67

Dirty Tricks of the Sands	

71

Sands of Death	

75

Sample Gladiators	

85

Matthew Sprange

Developer

Darren Pearce

Editor

Will Chapman

Interior Illustrations

Nick Egberts, Esther Sanz, Danilo Guida,
Scott Purdy, Pedro Potier, Alejandro
Gutiérrez, German Ponce, Dave Cousens,
Carlos
Henry,
Chad
Segesketter,
Pulpapocalipsis Studio

Special Thanks
Nicky Wong

Copyright Information

Gladiators of Legend ©2012 Mongoose Publishing. All rights reserved. Reproduction of non-Open Game Content
of this work by any means without the written permission of the publisher is expressly forbidden. Legend is
presented under the Open Game Licence. See page 96 for the text of this licence. All text paragraphs and tables
containing game mechanics and statistics derivative of Open Game Content and the System Reference Document
are considered to be Open Game Content. All other significant characters, names, places, items, art and text herein
are copyrighted by Mongoose Publishing. All rights reserved. Printed in USA
Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

introduction
It is not yet mid-morning and yet the air of excitement around the grand arena is palpable.
You arrived two hours before the first matches are due to commence, for the seats will fill up
quickly and you have no wish to endure the sun-blasted stone benches on the south side of
the arena for the whole afternoon. The crowds mill about you, all streaming for the grand
arena, some mute with trepidation, other proclaiming loudly which gladiator will triumph
in the matches. It has been a month since the last games day and you, along with everyone
else in the city, are eager to leave behind the concerns of your everyday life, replacing it with
an afternoon of fun, excitement and sheer passion.
Filing under the gigantic entrance archway of the north side, you marvel, as always, at the
sheer scale of the building. It has stood in the heart of the city for hundreds of years and
whilst you have been told it was constructed by mere mortals, many rumours abound of
incredible sorcery and the hand of the gods themselves in its foundations. In the darkness of
the great shadowy archway, dwarfed by both the size and age of this great place, it is in these
rumours you put your trust.
The sun crawls across the clear sky as you make your way through the gathering crowds and
into the daylight past the entrance. Before you lies the colossal sand-covered arena, banked
on all sides by rows and rows of stone seating. A major residential district could comfortably
rest inside the arena itself but you are well aware of the many supporting structures outside of
this building – prisons, barracks, training schools, living quarters, armouries, weaponsmiths
and even holding cages for incredible and magical wild creatures. The whole centre of the
city has been built around the magnificent grand arena and has forever formed the core of
your society. On occasion, you have heard the tales of mad and crazed travellers from other
lands in taverns you visit after a toiling day’s work. They sometimes speak of an even greater
arena built in some nation far across the southern sea. Impossible! What could be larger
than this place?
The whole crowd is herding towards the north end of the arena to claim the favoured seats
and you step slowly alongside every other spectator. Everyone looks to their left, to the arena
floor itself, in an effort to spy some clue as to which match will be set first. But, as always,
no clue has been given, for the sand is perfectly flat and uniform. By the end of the day, it
will be soaked in blood.
You finally come to a seat and are happy with your fortune, for it is right in the centre of
the north end and just four tiers up – you will have a splendid, almost ringside, view of the
action. For the next two hours, you sit patiently with everyone else, listening to conversations

2

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

of oncoming carnage and watching the rest of the arena slowly begin to fill with spectators.
There is a stir as the nobility of the city file into their shaded stand far across the arena on
the west side. The first match can now only be minutes away. Vendors prowl up and down
the tiers of seats, selling food and drink, though one man shoves a small parchment into your
hand, the scrap proclaiming the victories and prowess of Minimus, the halfling gladiator.
You have no official wagers placed today, but such information may prove useful if one of
your neighbours on this tier offers a bet on his match.
A huge cheer, resounding throughout the entire arena rises incredibly with volume and your
eyes are drawn to the sand where the first of the events is about to begin. The twelve men
are heavily costumed but not gladiators themselves – this is the pre-match entertainment. A
small number of shows are run by the actors, mostly parodying the games themselves, though
you could not help but chuckle at a satirical piece performed at the expense of Citus, a wellknown noble of dubious pleasures. You try to imagine what the poor man must feel like in
his expensive stand with the entire city staring and laughing at him. It is just, you decide.
The actors soon leave the sands, much to the relief of Citus no doubt, and a hush descends
upon the grand arena as the crowd, thousands upon thousands of people, the entire
population of the city, wait expectantly. You, and everyone else, are not silent for long as, in
the centre of the nobles’ stand, you spy the Lord Grelagor and his lady wife, twin rulers of
the city, step forward and salute the crowd. Once more, the mob roars its approval, though
more in anticipation of the coming matches than allegiance and loyalty. At a signal from
Lord Grelagor, twenty lightly armed and armoured men march on to the sands of the arena
as thousands of voices, yours amongst them, continue cheering ever louder. Very soon, blood
will flow.
The match is very familiar to you as all games days start this way. These are novice gladiators,
either slaves or those seeking fame and fortune, desperately competing to gain the notice of
the crowd. The match is short and bloody, but you focus on one woman closest to you, a
lithe and well-toned figure who, although outmatched in strength by most of her opponents,
adeptly avoids their blows whilst running them through with her spear. Before you know
it, she is the last gladiator standing and though you try hard to catch the arena manager’s
announcement, you miss her name. You will certainly watch out for her later though – she
may be worth a strong wager.
Bodies are cleared away by more slaves and intense conversation fills the arena as people
discuss the performance and outcome of that match. Another cheer rises as the arena
manager makes the announcement that Sketari and Deimos – you heard those names well
enough – the famed charioteering rivals, have decided to settle who is the greatest once and
for all. The midday heat is unnoticed as you immediately jump upon your seat to better
see this match – chariot racing is the fastest and deadliest of all arena events. It is also your
favourite. The two heavy chariots burst into the arena, sand flying up high behind them.
Turning to the man standing next to you, you quickly wager three silver on Deimos. A high
wager, but Deimos has long been your favoured gladiator. The blood is pumping and the
adrenaline coursing through your veins – there is nothing you enjoy so much as Games Day.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

3

8

Gladiator – Sands of Death

This book will provide you with everything you need to know in order to integrate
the world of the arena into your existing campaigns. The first part details the arenas
themselves and the people behind them – stable masters, nobles, arena managers and,
of course, the gladiators. Five fully detailed arenas are provided, ready to be slotted into
any town, city, or even dungeon.
Next comes new rules to reflect the vicious combats that take place on the sands. Rules
for chariots and their racing are also given alongside other, more esoteric matches. All
these new rules may also be used by adventuring parties as they delve into deeper urban
mysteries or traverse the harshest wilderness. Gladiators may work hard for the fame
and glory they deserve and, possibly, their freedom too.
Finally, there is Sands of Death, a complete game based on the Legend core rules.
Players each take the part of a stable master, training and grooming their gladiators in
the hopes of making their fortunes within the arena. Gladiators of rival stables fight
through a huge variety of matches, gradually gaining experience and skill as their stable
masters continue to rake in the gold pieces from their appearances.
We who are about to die, salute you!
Lord Regupol strolled aimlessly through the malodorous maze of the slavers’ dens, gold
pomander of roses suspended from a jewelled handle held delicately to his nose to soften if
not completely obscure the stench of humanoid suffering and close-quartered captivity. One
of the women of his harem had tried to escape so he had been forced to execute her and the
alleged accomplices as an example to the remaining girls. Now he searched for replacements.
He had already found a lovely pair of elven ‘maids,’ fair-haired, dark-eyed beauties both,
and was in search of a third girl to complete the set. He stepped gingerly over a puddle of filth
to gain a closer look at a slave who had dared make eye contact. What he saw when he drew
closer immediately caught his imagination and appealed to his sense of the visually absurd.
To verify his vision, he motioned his eunuch to bring the elven twins closer as he inspected
the human before him.
She stood slightly taller than the lord did, dark, wild hair framing a square, but somehow
still attractive face in which the bluest eyes he had ever seen stared at him with total selfconfidence. Her lean limbs were muscled nearly to the point of mannishness, though she was
quite obviously female. This woman retained her spirit, unlike the cowering fodder around
her. The vision this slave would make when paired with the two elves would delight his
noble friends and make them green with envy.

4

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

Lord Regupol turned, scanning the den for the slave master. He waved his pomander and
called to the loutish lump of a man who had greeted him as he wandered into the market.
His inquiry was cut short by the wand of his own pomander being held tight against his
throat, cutting of his air supply. He squeaked several times and batted ineffectually at the
strong, feminine hands that held the bar to his throat. Darkness swam dizzying circles
through his vision, distorting the hopeful faces of the elven maids, before engulfing him
completely.
‘Lord? My lord, are you alright?’ A gruff voice emerged from the swaddling blackness,
rousing Regupol. The noble opened his eyes and tried to focus on the face floating before him.
‘My lord, are you awake?’ The noble’s eyes confirmed what his nose told him; the slaver was
hovering close, trying to revive him.
‘Away brute. I am roused.’ Lord Regupol waved his hand in the slaver’s face and unsteadily
regained his feet.
‘A thousand pardons, Lord. I don’t know how the wench slipped her chains. I should have
warned you about her - she stole a sword and killed two of my guards on the caravan to the
city.’ The slaver spat through the blackened stumps of his teeth and muttered, ‘Gods forsaken
barbar! Nothing but trouble, first the raid, then the guards, now this.’
‘I want her.’
The slaver blinked. ‘But my lord, she tried to kill you. She is surely bound for the headsman’s
axe.’
‘I want her. Make it so.’
The flesh monger licked his lips nervously, ‘I don’t see how I could possibly let her go for less
than-’
Lord Regupol’s hard, dark eyes bored into the slaver’s face. ‘You will give her to me, or I will
see that it is your neck on the headsman’s block.’
‘I… but she – she’ll try to kill you at the first opportunity. At every opportunity!’
Lord Regupol glared at the now unconscious and well-guarded woman. ‘There will be no
opportunities where she is going. As she likes to fight and kill, I will send her to a place where
she will get her fill of it or die in the trying.’ The noble snapped an order over his shoulder,
‘Kime! Take this wench to the stable master. We’ll see how well she fares in the arena.’ The
eunuch nodded and motioned the guards to follow him with the unconscious woman.
‘Oh, and Kime, take these fool elves with you as well. I would hate to break up the set.’

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

5

8

overview of the arena
The arena is the centre of many societies and cultures. Based around the concept of
blood sport, crowds cheer whilst those on the sands battle for life. In such games, there
are no complex rules for winning and losing; it is simply kill or be killed. The victor
is the one with the strength and skill to slay every opponent, to rise above the carnage
with blood-stained weapon in hand to receive the adulation of a frenzied mob.
Only the most debased of races seem to revel in the thrill of the arena – goblinoids,
orckind, and humans. Arenas in the nations of dwarves and elves are almost unheard of,
though there are many tales of gladiatorial combat taking place in the cities of the elves’
darker-kin. It may not, on reflection, be so surprising that the younger races hunger for
the pain and suffering of others but it is clear humans take the spectacle to the greatest
heights. Whereas orcs and goblins show very little in the way of organisation in the
combats they engage in for excitement and bloodlust, humans proclaim themselves
sophisticated by raising immense arenas in the midst of their cities. Matches within
are highly organised, as is the system behind the arena that ensures its longevity and
continued supply of flesh for battle. In such civilisations, the arena is considered the
highest form of entertainment. As repugnant as they may seem to a visiting dwarf or
elf, there is often a far darker purpose behind the arena and, ultimately, it is not the
gladiator fighting within that is the true victim, but the crowd baying for his death.

Dark Designs
The greatest arenas are vast constructions by any measure, even in a world blessed
by a proliferation of magic, and many are centuries, even millennia old. Whilst any
border town of any pretension may build its own provincial circus in which to stage
gladiatorial matches, the resources required to even lay the foundations of a grand
arena are incredible, far beyond the comprehension of the crowd that regularly attends
it. Only the very greatest empires, rich in raw materials and bloated from the tribute
of dozens of dominion states may even consider such an awe-inspiring structure and if
these are available, it still takes a massive act of will for a ruler to commit to something
of such magnitude.
There are two main reasons behind a ruler’s decision to construct a grand arena. The
first is a simple statement to other, rival, nations and their own rulers. By building
the largest arena, indeed, what will likely be the greatest structure in the entire world,
the ruler is demonstrating his power in a direct and unambiguous fashion. After all,
if a nation is able to divert enough of its resources into both the construction and
maintenance of a grand arena, what might it be capable of in open warfare? Grand
arenas are never profitable enterprises, even in the few nations that charge their

6

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

7

8

populations for attendance. Even with fifty or sixty thousand people watching the
games, the immense cost of providing so many different and varied matches will drain
the coffers of even an empire unless it is truly massive.
The second reason for a grand arena coming into existence is one of control – the
domination of an entire population. Few empires are built with anything other than
brutality and even in a capital where the population is relatively free, trouble can (and
often does) arise. The greatest fear of any tyrant is that one day his power will crumble
and fade. Whilst a grand arena does nothing for the military power of an empire and
will drain far more gold than it brings in through increased trade, it does give everyone
in the city a focus in their lives. Men and women, high and low, will talk constantly
throughout the games about their favourite gladiators and the awesome events yet to be
staged. Rumours become rife. It keeps them from thinking too much about abuses of
political power, unfair laws, military strife on the border and the failure of corn crops.
By making the grand arena the very epicentre of his capital, even the most brutal of
tyrants can solidify his central base of power and make himself all but invulnerable
to his enemies, whether political or far more direct. If the games prove sufficiently
spectacular, he may even gain the admiration of the population, regardless of anything
else he does.
It is, perhaps, an irony that the fulcrum of such concerns of political and empirical
might rests on a relatively small handful of men and women. The presence of a grand
arena may impact an entire empire and hold tens of thousands in absolute awe, but the
entertainment provided comes from a select number of individuals – the gladiators.

Gladiators
There is forever a great deal of speculation and interest concerning those who dare
walk into the arena and catch the imagination of thousands. To a visitor from another
nation, the gladiator can appear as a god, ruthlessly slaying his enemies and swaying the
opinion of the crowd with a mere sword thrust. The truth, as always, is a little different.
The vast majority of gladiators in a grand arena are slaves – they have to be for there
is simply no way to convince huge numbers of freemen to enter the arena voluntarily.
During special occasions and anniversaries, games can easily run for over one hundred
consecutive days and lead to the deaths of ten thousand gladiators. Clearly, providing
gladiators for the arena is an industry in itself and this is exactly what arises in any
city with a grand arena. Slaves for the games may be criminals once rotting in prison,
captured enemy prisoners of war or simply brought into the city as trade in slave trains.
In a few empires, slaves may also be bred specifically to fight in the arena, their owners
constantly on the lookout for strength and speed.
Many receive little or no training in the weapons and armour they are given, their only
purpose to provide the sight of slaughter for a bloodthirsty crowd. From the ranks of
these poor wretches, a handful will emerge who are fitter and eminently more willing
to kill than the others and these are the ones their owners will lavish attention on. They
receive specialised training for the matches their owner wishes to compete in and better

8

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

accommodation. They will also begin to get paid, typically 1-10% of the winnings
gained from their matches, by order of the city’s ruler. A slave earning relatively large
sums of money is far less likely to rebel than one used only to hardship and rulers are
all too aware of the dangers posed by a gladiator revolt, for their combat prowess will
have been witnessed first hand in the arena. The amount a slave earns for appearances
varies with the generosity of the city’s ruler but it is possible for them to hoard enough
to buy their freedom from their owners within five to ten years. This lure of money
has even resulted in freemen, especially fighters, actually selling themselves into slavery
in the blind hope of gaining or rebuilding a fortune. It is perhaps an obvious fact that
few, slaves or freemen alike, ever live to see such dreams come to fruition. The arena is
splattered with the blood of too many fallen gladiators for their hopes to be realistic.
The average life expectancy of a gladiator is just one match – most are slain in their very
first appearance, the odds skewed against them as matches for new arrivals are often
sheer carnage, meat grinders designed to separate the potential greats from the rabble.
If a gladiator is able to live through a dozen matches, his chances of survival increase
dramatically, for by this time he has become hardened to the killing and has begun to
learn the fighting skills needed.
Alex Greene (order #4281056)

9

8

Something else also begins to happen at this time – the crowd will start to recognise
his name and expect to see a good show whenever he appears. The most successful
gladiators of all are not those who are merely able to slay every opponent they face,
but those who can engage the crowd and capture the imagination of the mob.
Experienced gladiators learn to work the crowd by adopting unusual mannerisms
or weapon combinations, and by demonstrating incredible flair and bravery as they
fight. Whenever these champions set foot upon the sands, the cheering of thousands is
deafening. It is not long before this adulation becomes the main focus of the gladiator’s
life, far more so than money or even freedom. Revelling in glory, he begins to live for
the roar of the crowd and, in so doing, makes himself ever more popular. Such men and
women may soon come to consider themselves invulnerable.

Stable Masters
The key figure in the life of every gladiator is his owner, the stable master. Such men are
usually either wealthy nobles or ex-gladiators who managed to find their fortune and
freedom. By a process of bidding and bribery, they are able to obtain contracts from
the grand arena that allow them to enter gladiators into matches and be paid for doing
so. They will then begin to buy worthy-looking slaves and equip them for the initial
matches. Many look upon the stable masters as callous flesh merchants, willing to trade
in pain and suffering for money.
Whilst a stable master must, indeed, retain a certain detachment, especially with new
and untrained slaves, it is very common for an attachment to form with favoured
gladiators. Whilst there will always be a sharp division between slave and master, it
is a stronger relationship than a knight may have with a favoured warhorse and this
comes as something of a surprise for many not aware of what exactly goes on within
the gladiator stables. Stable masters who were once gladiators themselves are often seen
growing relationships with their slaves and while they are likely to be just as hard and
punishing on a physical level, no doubt due to their own experiences from the past,
they also tend to train and groom their slaves as protégés rather than mere sources of
income.
Rivalries abound amongst different stables and their masters as a loss for one in the
arena is a financial gain for another. Underhanded tricks and ploys abound between
them but most would readily agree that it is not rival stable masters that cause the most
problems but the arena manager.

Arena Managers & Contracts
The arena manager enjoys a position of immense prestige, status and wealth within
the grand arena and is likely to be of noble birth, appointed by the city ruler himself.
His main duties revolve around the actual day-to-day running of the arena and as
such must always ensure enough gladiators are available, that beasts and monsters are
rare and exotic enough, the pre-match entertainment sufficiently amusing, the vendors
present for serving food and yet not charging too much – the list of his responsibilities

10

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

is endless. If he is successful, the games will run smoothly and the crowd will be
entertained. Failure will result in immediate dismissal and banishment from noble
society – a lot of the empire’s gold rests on his own personal abilities.
Games days typically take place in the grand arena every week or every month, but
special games to commemorate great events may last many consecutive days and always
place a great strain on the resources an arena manager has at his disposal. Gladiators
themselves tend to be the most sought after commodity, for thousands will be needed
for such events. To guarantee demand is met, arena managers institute a system of
contracts for stable masters. The benefit to the stable master is that he may freely
purchase slaves and be guaranteed a return in gold for every one he puts into the arena.
The downside is that the contract is incredibly binding and weighted purely in favour
of the arena. When demand is made for gladiators to compete in the nightmarish meat
grind of a re-enacted battle, the stable master has no choice but to comply, even if it
means potentially losing a favoured gladiator he has been nurturing.
A great deal of negotiation and manoeuvring takes place every games day as stable
masters constantly try to find a better deal for themselves, usually at the expense of
a rival. Most attempts are doomed to failure but a canny stable master always offers
something in return – arena managers tend to be extremely well paid, so straight
forward bribery rarely works. On the other hand, they also tend to be very paranoid
about putting on a stunning show, or spectacle as it is sometimes called, and its effect
on their continued position. More than one stable master has been able to keep his
gladiators out of the carnage of a battle by promising to provide some exotic and
magical creature for a match.

The Supporting Cast
Aside from the individuals detailed above, there are literally thousands of others
required to keep the grand arena in operation during a games day – stonemasons,
farmers, beast handlers, cartwrights, slaves, merchants, guards, vendors, noble patrons,
labourers and healers to name just a few. The grand arena is an industry in and of itself
and the economy of the capital is built around its presence.
Wizards are kept in constant employment by the grand arena and serve a wide
variety of functions. Those less skilled with powerful magicks may join the pre-match
entertainment, delighting the crowd with brilliant light displays or sorcerous energies
and loud but harmless explosions. While this may be felt as demeaning the art by some,
the grand arena rarely shows any compassion to those it uses.
Mages also keep watch for items of magical power smuggled on to the sands of the arena
by gladiators desperate for any advantage. Magically charged weapons and armour are
viewed with great suspicion by arena managers for such things may alter the course of
a match, or bring about its end far too soon. Theirs is the business of entertainment
and any gladiator found attempting to employ magic in a match is likely to be fined,
humiliated or even executed as a lesson to others.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

11

8

The presence of mages is most notable in the games themselves though. Whilst it is
relatively rare for them to enter as gladiators themselves, their ability to raise or lower
huge stone walls, create fog out of thin air and hinder or slow gladiators who might
otherwise have too great an advantage over an opponent, is well-employed by the arena
manager. Even darker magicks may be trivialised and used for the entertainment of
the crowd. Slain gladiators may both walk and fight once more with the presence of
a necromancer and a demonologist can provide nightmare creatures from the infernal
planes that the spectators have truly never witnessed before.

The Mob
The greatest consideration for any involved in the running of the grand arena, not least
for the city’s ruler, is the actual population, the crowd that lines the ranked tiers around
the sands or, as some nobles cynically call them, the mob.
The fundamental purpose of the grand arena is to amuse the crowd, capture their
popular imagination and by doing so, force them to think about the gladiators rather
than ordinary day-to-day concerns that could so easily cause problems for the ruler.
The crowd gambles and wagers on the outcome of matches and debates rage on who
is the finest gladiator or which is the better combination of weapons and armour.
Children emulate gladiators in the street as their parents pay silver and gold for busts
or statues of their favourite combatants. In a city ruled by the iron hand of an imperial
dictator, few are permitted to rise above their immediate station and so hopes and
dreams find their escape in the actions of the gladiator champion who succeeds time
and again within the arena.
Brawls in taverns can erupt when the population feels a gladiator has been unfairly
treated and many experience grief when their favoured is slain, actually entering into
a period of mourning as if a member of their own family had died. The irony that a
mere slave can cause such feelings in an entire population is not lost on scholars who
deign to study the effects of the grand arena, rather than merely cheer with bloodlust
with the rest of the mob.
The most interesting phenomenon revolving around the crowd, however, is their effect
upon the matches themselves. Gladiator champions quickly learn to get the crowd on
their side whenever they enter the arena, a process greatly speeded by their own fame
through countless victories, as well as judicious advertising on the part of their stable
master. When a crowd howls and chants the name of a gladiator, he will feel the effect
of thousands of minds, all wishing, praying even, for his success. His sword strokes and
spear thrusts become more accurate and powerful, even as his opponent is weakened

12

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

by the knowledge that the mob is demanding his own death. The effect is marked and
the outcome of many matches can actually be influenced by the crowd in this manner.
Some liken this to the morale boost troops in battle gain from being led by a great hero,
whilst others believe it is the will of the immortal gods that make the wishes of their
faithful manifest. Once again, it is left to the scholars to debate such issues – the mob
neither knows nor cares. They only wish to see great carnage and the flow of blood on
each and every games day.

Smaller Arenas
The grand arena is by no means the only venue in which gladiators fight. In an empire
with a grand arena in the heart of its capital, it is an inevitability that the smaller towns
of the outlying provinces will try their best to emulate the spectacle. Any town of
sufficient self-importance will begin the construction of its own arena, a far cry from
that of the capital in both size and scope, but a close enough approximation for a
population destined never to see the grand arena for themselves.
Such places are where many stable masters begin their careers and though matches tend
to be far less sophisticated, they are no less deadly for the gladiators themselves. The
more expensive matches, such as beast fights and chariot races will be absent altogether
and games days themselves will come more rarely but the crowds attending miss little –
the fundamental principles of bloodshed and slaughter are still present, no matter how
little thought and gold go behind them.
Away from the great empires, large arenas are far less common, for they are expensive
to run and without a population requiring constant suppression, many of the reasons
for their existence are absent. Individual city states may build smaller arenas within
their walls, though such places tend to be run for pure profit and slavery may be
outlawed altogether. These two factors result in far less spectacular matches and hence,
a reduced popularity, especially as the freemen fighting generally prefer to battle to the
first wound, rather than death.
Whatever the shape and form, from the largest grand arena to the most squalid pit
fight, it seems likely that the continued fascination with death and pain of the younger
races will ensure the existence of such places. Arenas represent the pinnacle of brutality
within a civilisation, but also hope for the mob, the stable masters and even the
gladiator slave who dreams of his eventual freedom.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

13

8

races of the spectacle
Almost every sentient race in the world has walked on to the sands of death as a
gladiator, be they freemen, captives or slaves. Arena managers are forever seeking new
and exotic combatants to retain the interest of the crowd but there are favourites both
readily available and in possession of the ability to contribute to the spectacle being
built in each day of the games.

Humans
Alone of all the races, it is the human that possess the greatest flexibility in terms of both
skill and adaptability. The vast majority of arenas are also built in human dominated
cities and thus it is far easier for the crowd to relate to their favoured gladiator. Being
the most numerous of all races ensures a steady supply for even the lowliest stable
master and arena managers are far more prepared to risk a human in new matches of
their devising than a harder to obtain humanoid.

14

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

As gladiators, humans can turn their abilities to almost any combatant role in the arena
and only be outmatched by other races in a few areas of speed and endurance, but
rarely both. Their penchant for blood-letting and strife is also a bonus to the crowd, for
there are few peoples capable of more outright savagery than the short-lived humans.

Dwarves
Though at a serious disadvantage in matches requiring speed and agility, dwarves are
rock solid warriors able to sustain terrible injuries that would floor a being of another
race. Those gambling on the outcome of matches always weigh odds very carefully
when a dwarf steps into the arena for their sturdiness and fortitude is renowned.
Stable masters often work hard to procure several dwarves amongst their gladiators
for whilst their combat capabilities are beyond reproach, they often have a hard time
fighting alongside any not of their own race. Their known antagonism towards elves can
spell the disruption of a complete stable with duels and brawls putting gladiators out
of action before they can even reach the arena, much to the chagrin of their owners. A
stable master is often left hoping the damage caused is paid for by the dwarf ’s winnings
in his next match. It should also be noted that dwarves are renowned for making very
poor chariot drivers. Whilst their slightly smaller size does indeed aid them in taking
cover from an opponent’s blows whilst in the chariot itself, they have little or no affinity
towards horses and their control, an essential characteristic for any good driver.

Elves
The slight form of an elf entering the arena can sometimes be accompanied by howls
of derision from the mob. Shorter than humans and with a build seemingly too fragile
for the rigours of intense combat, they do however possess a natural quickness and
dexterity that enables them to dodge the lumbering blows of others, and then strike
with deadly accuracy.
When permitted to engage in matches that allow them to fight autonomously with
little regard for allies, they are at their best. An elf allowed to choose his own ground
within the arena and use his natural talents can be a terrible foe to face. When physically
restricted in some way, however, an elf loses many advantages to more flexible races,
such as humans.

Halflings
Human dominated arenas often group halflings and dwarves as gladiators, with the
ignorant often incorrectly naming one as the other – to the mob, they all look alike.
Enterprising arena managers often put on comedy matches, with many poorly armed
and trained halflings and dwarves thrown into combat against a much larger monster
This is one of the crueller matches one may see in an arena.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

15

8

A very small number of halflings however, learn to fight on almost equal terms
against the larger gladiators. They give much ground in terms of strength with their
best blows sometimes almost completely ineffective against the arena champions.
Their typically gentle temperament is also a hindrance to the bloody work of
fighting but the rare breed amongst both race may gain, through years of pitiless
slavery, a harder edge, a desire to achieve freedom and a passion for killing. Such
gladiators manage to find they do indeed possess advantages others do not. They are
immediately underestimated whenever walking on to the sands, sometimes leading
to a fatal overconfidence in their opponents. Their small size can also be utilised to
dodge the blows of their enemies. If properly trained in speed and accuracy, a halfling
may well become respected as a gladiator in their own right, even if they are unlikely
to become true champions.

Goblinoids
The goblinoid races are a common sight in many arenas for they are numerous
in the world and easily fit into the role of villainous gladiators for the crowd to
despise. Spectators are always keen to see races so very different from themselves
and yet rarely bother with the distinctions between each goblinoid. Arena managers
and stable masters are very much aware of the differences between goblins and
hobgoblins.
Goblins are captured relatively easily for use in the arena and may thus be used in
large numbers. They are cowardly and sneaky creatures that must always be watched
whilst in captivity, but they make ideal hordes for the battles staged in the arena.
Arena managers may also set goblins against halflings and dwarves as an amusing midafternoon diversion for the crowd.
Hobgoblins are another matter entirely and this race can produce very good gladiators
indeed. Their love of combat and maintenance of weapons and armour make them
a great choice for stable masters willing to gain the reputation for training evil
combatants. Hobgoblins often enjoy life as a gladiator and most quickly forget they
are enslaved when they begin to earn huge amounts of gold for work they ordinarily
consider a worthwhile pastime.

Orcs and Half-Orcs
There have been many famous orc and half-orc gladiators over the centuries, becoming
the villains the mob loves to hate. As renowned as goblinoids for being the evil
barbarians of the wastes that forever plague civilisation with their raiding, there exists a
certain satisfaction amongst those within the cities at seeing such creatures fight and die
for their entertainment. The unfortunate effect of this is that half-orcs are seen only as

16

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

brute monsters with little use or value outside of the arena. Those entering such a city
are likely to be quickly captured, enslaved and made into gladiators.
Orcs make for capable, if unsophisticated, gladiators and may even come to enjoy
both the work and the rewards. A half-orc may possess many of the traits that make
humans such good gladiators but they are rarely treated any differently to fullblooded orcs. Any humanity they may possess is quickly eroded by the trials forced
upon them.

Other Races
In the constant search for bigger and better games, together with any ruler’s wish to
outdo and outspend his predecessors, arena managers are forced to constantly devise
new matches and locate never before seen gladiators. The list of sentient races that have
been forced into slavery for the games is almost endless but there are a few which have
become firm favourites with the crowd over the years.
Giants are sought after as few people ever see them outside the arena, and matches
involving such a huge and powerful race are always stunning to witness. One everpopular match pits a single giant against several axe-wielding dwarves.
Any race as long as they can be captured can make a pretty good gladiator; the problem
is how does one really hold onto a giant or dare imprison a dragon?

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

17

8

the arenas
Throughout the worlds of fantasy, there is a staggering array of arenas. Some are no
better than small pits set in the basements of the most disreputable of establishments,
where low-life warriors and rogues engage in brutal fights to the death for just a few
silver coins. Others are huge affairs, grander even than the real-life Roman Colosseum
and dominating the city built around them as they house every kind of gladiator known.
Whatever their size and grandeur, all arenas serve the same purpose – to provide the
most bloodthirsty of entertainment for an audience jaded and dispirited with their
ordinary, mundane lives.
Five example arenas are presented here, all of varying sizes and complexity. Full backgrounds
are provided for each, allowing a Games Master to either simply ‘drop’ them into any existing
campaign as he sees fit, or modify them to suit specific towns and cities of the nations his Player
Characters travel within. Alternatively, any of the arenas may be used as the basis of the Sands
of Death game.

Pit Fights
In every walk of life there are those who simply do not fit in. For whatever reason, they
are below the law. The world of gladiatorial combat is no different and whilst most
arenas, large and small, fulfil important duties with regards to keeping the populace
content and entertained, there are some that go unregulated, their prime purpose being
to provide hardened gamblers with the ultimate in high-stakes wagering. Like so many
underbellies, pit fights are looked upon with disdain by haughty stable masters who
frequent the great arenas of the world. Many may have conveniently forgotten their
own roots…

The Strutting Wench
Tylos Gart’s tavern, the Strutting Wench, is on the outside no different to a thousand
other wayside taverns. Warm, inviting and comfortable, it invites the passing visitor to
tie his mount up and rest the night in comfort. Seemingly normal in every way, it is the
perfect front for the tavern’s alternate business.
Tylos has been a pit fight master for most of his adult life, having followed in his
father’s footsteps, and he acquired the Strutting Wench precisely because of its location.
Having already been driven out of two towns for arranging pit fights, Tylos wanted
an establishment a little further from civilised settlements and he found what he was
looking for at the Strutting Wench.

18

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

The pit fight master looks for an innocuous property, without an overly-large clientele,
and with the particular facilities necessary for staging pit fights. Specifically, the tavern
needs a large underground area available to hold the actual fights, perhaps a cellar or
small set of caves, and it is the latter which attracted Tylos to the Strutting Wench. Built
on the roadside against a steep crag for protection against the harsh north winds, the
builder took advantage of the natural rock caves at the rear and beneath to turn it into
a large and rather splendid wine cellar.
The tavern had been doing poorly when Tylos arrived to take it off the hands of
the pleasantly surprised innkeeper. He closed it for nearly two months whilst the
appropriate alterations were made. First, the overly-large cellar was effectively separated
into three sections, with the smallest area, nearest to the descending stairs, retained
for wine. With a false door built into the racks, Tylos began to construct the major
part of his business enterprise. His workers dug into the stone floor and a square pit,
measuring fifteen feet per side was sunk seven feet into the ground below. After this, at
the very rear of the caves far from any inquisitive ears, a small holding area little more
than a wooden cage was constructed, into which the more involuntary combatants of
the pit fight were intended to be kept.
From the bottom of the cellar stairs, a visiting patrol would have no idea that a
thriving pit fight ring is in operation mere feet from them. The hidden door is easily
concealed with various bottles breaking up any suggestions of an uneven surface and
rush matting on the floor concealing any tell-tale footprints. Behind the door the
atmosphere changes, even when the pit is unoccupied. Lining the edges of the pit itself
are all manner of protruding spikes – bones, stakes, and old weapon blades, designed
of course, to keep any unwilling contestants within. Surrounding the pit are a number
of wooden benches with spaces in the middle of the northern and southern sides for
the fighters to enter the arena. These are the only unprotected sections and the Fighters
either jump or are thrown bodily into the pit. There are no grand entrances to be made
here. The walls of the cellar remain as they were when they housed only wine, with
the addition of a few extra torches to play a shadowed light across the bloodthirsty
proceedings.
Opening the solid front door of the tavern, Aramor, noted seller of fine herbs, was too busy
shaking the excess rain from his cloak and hat to notice the anticipation on many of the faces
in the room at his arrival. He trudged wearily to the bar where the landlord was quietly
fingering a wooden mug. Odd how all tavern keepers seemed to do the same when they had
nothing better to do, he thought.
‘Good evening, traveller,’ said the landlord in greeting.
‘Oh, good evening,’ Aramor replied, too wet and miserable to notice the barman’s coolly
appraising stare.
‘A drink?’ ventured the tavern keeper, his eyes imperceptibly looking past Aramor and
flickering to another man, sitting quietly at a small table.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

19

8

‘Please,’ replied Aramor. ‘Hot wine, perchance?’
The barman nodded, turning to a still-steaming cauldron. ‘Freshly made, sir.’
Aramor took the filled mug gratefully, inhaling the sweet aroma. ‘How much?’ he enquired.
‘Don’t worry, sir. We’ll settle up later. You’ll be staying, I assume?’ Aramor didn’t know the
half of it. ‘Perhaps you’d like to sit over by the fire in the corner and get yourself warm.’
Aramor nodded, clutching the hot mug in both hands. Glancing about, he saw that against
one of the walls near the fire was a particularly comfortable-looking chair. It struck him
as a bit odd that such a chair would go unused but when he looked about the tavern, the
half-dozen or so regulars studiously ignored him. Returning the compliment, he sank himself
into the chair.
Staring deeply into the cup, Aramor took several sips, allowing his mind to wander. What
would prices be like in the next town? Would there be a friendly guild on hand to help him
trade? Lost in thought, he was just remembering his faithful mule outside when he thought
he heard a gentle grating sound behind him. Odd, he thought, as the chair began tipping
backwards of its own accord.
He woke up later to the noise of men arguing. He couldn’t make out what it was they were
arguing about and when he struggled up to a sitting position, he found one of his legs was
manacled to the dirt wall behind him. Realisation began to sink in and with it came panic.
He didn’t know why he was suddenly a chained captive, but none of the possibilities seemed
good ones.
‘Where in the name of the gods am I?’ Aramor yelled, his courage swelling slightly at the
sound of his own voice. The arguing stopped at once and footsteps sounded, coming towards
him.
A man came around the corner of what looked to be the approaches to a cellar and smiled
coldly at the herb seller. ‘You’re awake then? About time.’
‘Look, if it’s money you want,’ Aramor began, ‘Then I-’
‘-Have none,’ finished the man. ‘More to the point, can you use a sword?’
‘A sword? Of course not. What do I look like?’
‘Dead meat.’
Upstairs in the tavern, the only work needed was to a section of the wall directly
over the holding cage below. A secret opening was built into the wall and the most
comfortable chair in the tavern rigged up against it. On the floor at another table
nearby, always occupied by one of Tylos’ henchmen, a covert foot switch releases the
wall trigger, sliding the chair backwards and depositing the unfortunate occupant

20

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

down into the pit. With a less than twenty foot drop, most survive to die in a more
spectacular way later.
The advantages Tylos has at the Strutting Wench over his previous ventures are all
primarily down to location. A dozen miles north and south to the nearest towns, he
benefits both from regular stopovers and comfort of distance from those civilised folk
who may blanche at the pit fighting enterprise. He is also now fully independent,
owing no tithes to the thieves’ guilds and professional extortionists who control the
pit fights and other nefarious activities that go on within more formal communities.
The modus operandi at the Strutting Wench is gloriously straightforward. Having set
up his business, Tylos personally travelled to both the local towns, frequenting the
taverns and determining whether any pit fight operation was already in existence. He
discovered two important pieces of information; first, there were indeed no rival setups neighbouring him, and second, like everywhere else, these men of the north had a
taste for gambling. He already knew them to be a violent and unsympathetic people.
Perfect for his needs.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

21

8

The staff – remarkably few – were in place quickly. All the old keeper’s people were
politely told their services would no longer be required, although one senior barman
did have to be removed with a hatchet, and Tylos recruited his own people. His trusted
lieutenant, Korsk, is responsible for the operation of the trap door and he also makes
sure the two thugs used as security during pit fight bouts are kept in fighting condition
themselves.
Korsk also acts as Tylos’ book-keeper, organising betting and earning a cut of the
winnings. The regulars bet on anything related to the pit fights, from the time taken
for first blood to the number of visible wounds on a corpse. This suits Tylos just fine as
it means that he can use victims of all shapes and sizes, rather than just those suited for
fighting. That said, the biggest treat for his punters still comes from proper gladiatorial
matches, either held between two local toughs fighting for prize money or, alternatively,
when a renowned pit fighter arrives in the locale, challenging all-comers to defeat him.

Orc Cavern Arenas
Humans are by no means the only race to have discovered the joys of the spectacle.
Other humanoid races, and in particular orcs, have developed a taste for the bloodsoaked entertainment and have adapted it to their own way of life. Deep within their
tribal caverns, these creatures have learnt to thrill at the sight of captured travellers
and adventurers ruthlessly fighting those who were their former companions, in the
desperate hope that survival will perhaps earn them a reprieve on their own doomed
existence. This can be a most ignoble finale for an adventuring party, becoming the
playthings of the very creatures they have looked upon with such disdain in the past.

Baldrog’s Cavern

When Baldrog, the orcish chieftain of the Foot Cutter tribe, was captured in battle
against a human army, none of his followers expected to see him again. A new chieftain
forced his way to the summit, and life continued much as it always had. Baldrog was
quickly forgotten as he was taken to the town of his conquerors, expecting a swift
execution. It came as no little surprise when he was anatomically examined by a
veritable grandfather before being moved again, this time to become gladiator.
Baldrog knew what gladiators were, of course. He knew humans loved to watch others
fighting – to the death, he presumed – rather than be forced to do it themselves. He
had always regarded it as a weakness, yet as soon as he strode into his first arena match,
Baldrog became hooked on the adrenaline rush. It also turned out that he was rather
good at it. However, Baldrog refused to be anybody’s entertainment. He still had grand
plans of his own.
After many years, Baldrog finally managed to slay his trainer and made his escape.
Making slow passage back to his original tribal lands, Baldrog naively assumed he
would be welcomed back as chieftain immediately. However, life had moved on for
the Foot Cutters, and Grourk, the new chieftain, had no intention of relinquishing
power to a dead orc. Unfortunately for the new leader, Baldrog had developed from

22

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

a notable fighter into a superb one. Whereas once before a number of his lieutenants
had previously considered challenging him for leadership of the Foot Cutters, it rapidly
became apparent that the returning orc was very different to the chieftain they had
once known. Using tricks he had mastered on the sands of death, Baldrog ruthlessly
butchered Grourk and in doing so impressed upon his subjects just how capable a
warrior he had become.
The intention had been merely to regain his dominant tribal position, but Baldrog’s
display made a strong impact upon the Foot Cutters. They wanted to know how he
had learnt to fight so well and, more than that, they had enjoyed the display as it had
possessed a showmanship they had never before witnessed. In the past, a duel between
two orcs had been over and forgotten as soon as a victor emerged, but Baldrog had
made a lasting impression and it was one not lost on him. He began to wonder exactly
why the human nobles provided gladiators for their subjects. Was it to keep them
satisfied and content? Might such an arena not work for the orcs below him as well?
It was not as great a leap of orcish logic as might be imagined. Baldrog had smelt the
excitement on his orcs and it was far more intense than anything he had scented before.
Raw animal instinct can be just as sharp as the keenest mind.
Accordingly, Baldrog set his mind to turning the strongest of his orcs into gladiators.
Calls for volunteers went unanswered. He knew that to press his own tribe too
hard would be folly but fortunately an answer readily presented itself when a party
of adventurers were captured trying to invade the Foot Cutters’ territory. Normally
they would simply have been tortured but Baldrog saw his opportunity. Of the five
prisoners, one proved to be a wizard and was slain out of hand for fear his magical
powers would prove too great for the orcs to imprison. The other four all seemed to
know how to fight but they were friends and steadfastly refused to co-operate with
Baldrog’s idea for arena combat once they discovered the orc’s intent. At first Baldrog
was frustrated for to make this work as he planned, he needed the adventurers to fight.
It took four days without food and continual, though ultimately worthless, promises of
freedom for any emerging victor but eventually Baldrog had four potential gladiators
prepared to fight one another. Led down into the great cavern where the orcs held
council, a rough circle of shielded warriors were formed into the approximation of an
arena by Baldrog himself.
Two of the would-be combatants, a dwarf and an elf, still resisted the bestial concept of
gladiatorial combat and balked at the prospect of fighting so Baldrog sagely pitted each
against one of the humans. The humans, it turned out, were the most easily swayed into
fighting their past comrades and their aspirations towards noble conduct fell far short of
the haughty elf and the austere dwarf. Neither human made it past their first fight. The
poor light of the cavern gave the dwarf and elf too great an advantage over them. Both
dwarf and elf quickly grasped that to remain passive was to invite death at the hands
of a supposed friend and instinct began to take over as they fought desperately in front
of their captors, shadows flickering back and forth behind them, magnified against the
cavern walls. That the dwarf went on to slay the elf in the final match meant little to
Baldrog. It was the effect it had upon the Foot Cutters which interested him.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

23

8

In the aftermath of this first fight, Baldrog began to improve his cavern arena somewhat.
Still used as the main meeting hall for the Foot Cutters, the place changes dramatically
when a gladiatorial match is due. In a parody of the great human arenas, sand was
scattered across the rock floor and hunting skins on the walls replaced by poor orc
artistry of successful gladiators, painted directly onto the rock with the blood of their
victims. In pride of place still endures the picture of the unnamed dwarf who won the
first match and was then ritually burnt to death the following day. Even Baldrog could
not conceive the dwarf had actually believed him about attaining freedom.

The Spread of Orc Cavern Arenas

Unlike the humans, the notion of gladiatorial entertainment is not one that naturally
springs to the orcish mind. It is not that they cannot find the sight of killing entertaining,
far from it. The race simply lacks the artistic imagination needed to convert death into
entertainment of any degree of sophistication. Occasionally, former orc gladiators have
returned to their tribes with wild tales of the arena but not all fare as well as Baldrog.
However, word among orcs spreads fast and soon members of other tribes were visiting
the Foot Cutters to see for themselves the arena he had constructed. Before long, they
began to bring prisoners of their own to challenge whoever the Foot Cutters had to
offer. On very rare occasions, Baldrog himself donned his old armour and took to the
arena himself, to demonstrate to other orc tribes the fighting style of which they had
heard. The picture of the half-elf who finally managed to slay him joined the others on
the cavern walls.
Baldrog’s own death, however, did nothing to slow down the spread of cavern
fighting. Whereas before visiting orc tribes had been somewhat in awe of the ageing
gladiator, they now felt no constraints about using their own caverns to expand the
entertainment. Before long, a vast network of underground gladiatorial arenas sprang
up, each with the traditional sand floor and wall paintings made famous by Baldrog.
The bouts themselves rarely deviate much from the original concept and invariably
captured adventurers fight one another for the promise of extended life and eventual
freedom. They are all doomed, however, for orcs have little wish to keep such dangerous
prisoners for long and so the victor is rarely allowed to survive a match, no matter how
hard he has fought.

The Provincial Circus
Whilst every gladiator may imagine himself striding powerfully out into one of the great
city arenas of the world, most spend their entire, and often short, careers performing in
the provincial circuses which litter the nations of mankind. These small arenas fulfil a
vital communal role, often acting as a multi-purpose site; meeting place, entertainment
venue and governmental building. Unlike the greater arenas, most provincial circuses
are owned by the town in which they stand, with an arena master handling the daily
affairs of the venue. As such, the gladiatorial facilities are less specialised than those
found in the larger arenas and this can greatly limit the nature of the games held.

24

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

Syman’s Amphitheatre

The amphitheatre managed by Syman is typical of those circuses which serve the
parochial populaces of the world. The structure itself is primarily wooden, elliptical
in design and with one open end. The seating is almost wholly natural, the design
being built around a naturally tiered rock formation which provides banked seating for
the crowds. A specially constructed and covered enclosure for the nobility is centrally
located at the front of the curved rock seating.
When the town was first founded, the elders met in this natural court and, over time, it
became the hub of the settlement, requiring constant improvements to befit its growing
status. Behind the rising tiers, an outlining wooden wall was constructed to mirror the
natural shape, with a squared gateway constructed at the apex, necessitating a wide
flight of steps to be built on the external approach. Due to the almost perpetually fine
weather in this broiling land, a roof was considered an unnecessary luxury. Initially
this adaptation was thought satisfactory but with the arrival of gladiatorial combat, it
became clear the arena would need to undergo major improvements. A fully enclosed
barracks was constructed along one side where the gladiators themselves would be
housed. Opposite, a series of holding cells were built, designed to keep either prisoners
or wild creatures as the need arose. A six foot palisade was also added to separate
the crowd from the gladiators, necessitating many spectators to stand up in order to
see the combats taking place. The crowd have taken to bringing their own awnings
with them on games days, created from a colourful farrago of materials raised up on
canes, adding a unique dimension to the circus of which both Syman and his noble
employers approve. With the arena complete, the town now had a fine circus, shaped
like a slightly irregular and incomplete oval. With a plethora of sand nearby, it was
decided to cover the natural grass to enhance the atmosphere, as well as to facilitate the
cleaning and maintenance of the arena. Two rival stable masters were brought in from
one of the city arenas for the inaugural three-day spectacle, which sadly turned into a
one-afternoon affair when the first fourteen paired fighters escaped through the open
end, easily slaughtering the inexperienced members of the civic militia posted to stop
such an occurrence.
It was considerably easier to round up fleeing gladiators than it was to come up with
a satisfactory answer to this new problem. The obvious resolution, namely to fully
encircle the site, was rejected due to the relative softness of the ground. It was at this
point that Syman, the current arena master, took over the role following the removal
of his predecessor, who had been retired for this debacle. Syman’s solution was to dig
a moat twenty feet deep and ten feet wide into the ground and line it with sharpened
stakes. It made the far end of the arena look oddly similar to an armed camp but
considering the lack of alternatives it was approved and, indeed, achieved satisfactory
results.
The arena master’s role in a provincial circus is as a jack-of-all-trades and Syman has to
balance the several civic functions which his office must serve, rather than concentrating
purely upon martial entertainment. The arena is regularly used for public meetings,

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

25

8

when the council of elders wish to conduct an open session and it also doubles up as
a law court for the occasional trials which are deemed important enough to actually
publicise.
Furthermore, fighting is not the only form of entertainment which the arena hosts.
Various wandering troupes of performers are allowed to ply their trade when no other
events hold sway and the athletics competitions which the locals so adore are also held
within the stadium. Another form of public entertainment accommodated is rather
less aesthetic but none the less highly popular - the execution of criminals. It is Syman’s
responsibility to act as the local prison warden on top of his other duties, using the
holding cells to gather together enough victims to make a mass execution worth turning
up for. These have slowly become art-forms in themselves and Syman has responded
admirably with various forms of dismissal, from the ever-popular burning at the stake
to grand meals for the local wildlife. One particularly impressive show involved a mass
starvation of one hundred and three prisoners who were chained to posts embedded in
the ground and simply left there. Each day crowds were allowed in to see who had died,
and the final survivor was eventually given his freedom after sixteen days.
Ruzman sat impassively in the wooden barracks block, taking in the sounds of the arena
beyond the simple double doors out of sight along the angled corridor. He looked carelessly
about, eyeing up his stable-mates. No two were armed identically, a mark of his stable
master Zuabir, and it made him reconsider his own equipment, calmly checking it over as
he had been taught to do. The steamy local weather dictated a minimal amount of clothing
and Ruzman wore only a short kilt in addition to his fighting equipment. This consisted
of a chainmail sleeve on his right arm, attached by leather straps across his chest, light iron
greaves, a long thrusting spear and a three-headed bolas. He wore no helmet, which rather
pleased him as he always considered he had a rather formidable profile. The spear would
keep opponents at arm’s length anyway.
Ruzman stood up dutifully as one of Zuabir’s slaves came over to oil his body. It was a
standard part of the act, improving the appearance of the gladiator and making him far
harder to grapple. He studiously ignored the tendering slave – there was a pecking order
everywhere, even in gladiatorial stables.
Having been fully anointed, Ruzman sat down, twirling the bolas nonchalantly whilst he
considered his particular bout. His opponent would already be on the sand, he had been
told. Unlike the arenas where the gladiators came out from opposite tunnels, here the simple
design meant that the fighters of the other school were only a wooden wall away, and it was
considered improper for them to walk out side by side. Nobody wanted to take the risk of the
fight being over before the public might actually see it.
He smiled at the thought, wondering if it had ever happened. It mattered not. Surprise was
the constant companion of the professional gladiator and Ruzman knew he could live with
it. He had a natural aptitude with the bolas and he was certain few other fighters would be
experienced in facing them. That would be his decisive advantage, of course.

26

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

A great cheer from outside told him that one of his predecessors had succumbed and he stood
up unhesitatingly, knowing he was the next into the arena. The applause began to die down
and Ruzman heard the faint sound of Syman announcing his imminent arrival in the arena
as he sensed an attendant approaching him. He followed the man’s motion and walked into
the narrow corridor. They probably couldn’t get two fighters abreast here if they wanted to.
As the doors opened ahead of him, he shut his eyes briefly to prevent the brilliant daylight
from blinding him. Stepping into the arena, he acknowledged the cheers of the crowd with
a more flamboyant twirl of the bolas.
Less than a minute later Osric stomped back towards the barracks. He couldn’t wait to get
away from the foetid heat of the arena. As he walked his foot struck against something and
he looked down, slightly puzzled. Then he smiled. Bolas! What idiot would use those?
In such limited circumstances, Syman is compelled to restrict the nature of the
gladiatorial games that he supervises. With only one entrance in the barracks block,
little in the way of flashy run outs can be arranged, meaning that some of the combatants
must be in the arena ahead of the match. Similarly, the holding pens do not allow wild
creatures to be unleashed whilst still inside, although Syman has cunningly got around
this by positioning a mobile cage in the arena which can be covered by concealing
drapery until it is needed. When the covering is pulled back, the crowds are treated to
the sight of whatever beast Syman has managed to acquire for their pleasure.

City Arenas
Only the best get to perform in the large cities, for these are the only places that can
support such specialised arenas. Here there is no need to tolerate a weekly flea market or
move aside because the auditorium is required by the civic authorities. These structures
are owned by the state, although not necessarily directly by the ruler, and they are
designed with two specific intentions. Firstly, to provide the citizens of the city, and
indeed the whole land, with a focal point for their entertainment and secondly, as
a statement of power and grandeur. The various human nations constantly strive to
maintain the finest arena, seeing it as a slight to be left behind, the implication being
the country is unable to compete in the world. To visiting dwarf and elf dignitaries,
these hippodromes are both perturbing and nauseating. They symbolise all that is base
in humanity. Even the names of the arenas epitomise, to the likes of elves at least, a
low vulgarity, although to humans the title of the arena is as important as its location.

The Dragon’s Maw

This arena is typical of what might be found in a large city of any human nation.
Constructed within the city walls at the junction of two major thoroughfares, it
dominates the skyline with its awesome presence, a symbol of the power of nobility.
The Dragon’s Maw took over ten years to construct with a workforce of twenty
thousand goblins, prisoners of a highly successful military campaign. The travertine
used to face the edifice emptied a whole quarry some thirteen miles from the city, and

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

27

8

a double line of goblinoids stretched the entire distance, transferring the stone by hand.
Few survived, although this was of little relevance to the humans who would bring
their families out specially to watch the humanoid chain labour throughout all seasons.
The arena itself is a huge oval, as is traditional, measuring just under two thousand feet
around the outside walls, and its three tiers reach one hundred and fifty feet into the
sky. Protruding from the very top tier are wooden poles, designed to take an enormous
canvas sun canopy which can be deployed in high summer to protect the spectators
from the ravages of the midday sun. Over fifty thousand onlookers can be seated in
moderate comfort under this canopy. The arena floor is of wooden construction,
covered with a thick layer of sand as is expected.
Invisible beneath the arena, lie the warren of rooms, tunnels and lifts which are
really the heart of the stadium. There is room for nearly two thousand gladiators and
one thousand beasts, both kept in a sumptuous comfort that would embarrass the
landlords of many fine overnight roadhouses. No expense has been spared and on
many occasions members of the nobility come down to share meals with a stable of
gladiators or to admire a particular creature. One special area is set aside for the school
of gladiators permanently based at the arena. The Dragon’s Teeth, as they are known,
are considered the best of the best, the pinnacle of gladiatorial vigour, and only one
step away from freedom and riches. They wear specially designed armour, evoking the
imagery of dragons, and their shields bear draconic motifs. A number of the Dragon’s
Teeth have survived to attain their freedom and live in the lap of luxury. For each of
these though, a thousand others have stained the sands of the arena with their own
blood. Such is the price of success.
Access to the arena is through four vast, open archways at ground level, designed like
the mouths of dragons, through which the public walk. Three are for the general
population but the fourth is restricted to the elite of society and to the gladiators
themselves. On games days, only the nobility enter, the gladiators themselves being
safely ensconced below. However, when not needed within the arena, the gladiators
have upward access by means of a ramp leading up to the gateway. From there they go
to various training establishments or, on occasion, into the city itself.
Seating within the arena is, like everywhere else, based upon social rank with the
lowermost seated in the highest tier, and the foundation reserved for the aristocracy.
Within the lower tier, a large covered podium rises up and back partially into the
second section and here royalty and their personal guests are seated. The design of the
podium is relatively open, as kings and queens show their subjects just what kind of
grandeur their rulers command. At the rear of the podium is a private lift that allows
direct access to the subterranean layer below. This has been designed both as a means
of viewing the stars of the arena, but also as a potential escape route in the event of
unforeseen calamity.
In front of the lower tier, rising nearly three feet above their ground level, a fifteen foot
deep bulwark separates the crowd from the arena itself, and if that is not enough, a
deep, water-filled trench four feet wide makes sure that the gladiators gain no access to

28

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

their betters. In fact, it is the contents of the trench rather than the water itself which
accomplishes this feat, for within the murky waters reside all manner of carnivorous
river life, waiting hopefully for a misplaced foot or falling body.
In the city, gladiatorial spectacles are free. For the upper classes, their limited numbers
guarantees a right of access but for the masses, a lottery system determines who will gain
the right to see a particular day’s sport. Being as games invariably last a number of days,
this means a fair proportion of the public have the chance to see the entertainment.
It is considered crucial to the continued harmony of the city that the people continue
to receive their entertainment free of charge. The spectacles are held at fixed intervals
throughout the year, over specific religious holidays and often senior clerics are called
to give their blessing to the bloodshed and executions.
Like their country cousins in the provinces, captured criminals are also held over to
meet their fate in front of the public. However, in the city, style is as important as
content and visiting country folk lucky enough to draw a seat in the upper tiers are
often amazed by the imagination of the displays put on for their benefit. On one
occasion, Kalaji, an infamous mass poisoner was individually executed in one of the
morning prequels to the actual afternoon combats. Rather than simply burn him at the
stake or decapitate him, a ‘hunt’ was arranged, with trees and bushes dotted about the
arena, including a number of theoretical hiding places. When the time was right, Kalaji
rose from below on one of the lifts simultaneously with two huge tigers on the opposite
side of the arena. The beasts had been starved for three days beforehand and were
ready to eat anything. The tigers themselves needed separating more than once with
whips but once they got the scent of the prisoner, there was much entertainment as he
looked for a place of safety, having been told that if he survived for twenty minutes he
could walk free. Spying the tallest tree in the arena, Kalaji naturally climbed it, hoping
that the hourglass would run its course before the tigers got to him. However, the tree
was a carefully constructed trap, positioned on one of the lift trapdoors. With time
running out and the circling tigers apparently frustrated, the trapdoor swung up almost
imperceptibly, unbalancing the terrified killer and dropping him to his fate.
Whenever games are due to take place, the population of the city swells considerably in
size. The rich desert their country estates and the peasants their flocks, and a camp of
tents surrounds the already over-sized settlement. Those lucky enough to gain entrance
will see almost every type of gladiatorial contest known to man.

Grand Arenas
City arenas are deemed by many as the near pinnacle of gladiatorial combat but far above
them stand the grand arenas. Such incredible edifices are not meant to be challenged
by any rival. The grand arenas are invariably colossal in every sense, dominating the
skyline for miles around. They are very much an extension of the ego of the founder,
designed as much to be a monument to him as a place of entertainment for others.
Hefting a light crossbow across his shoulder, Hjeraldo marched arrogantly into the arena.
His was the last bout of the day, and the last bout was always a special one. At the conclusion
Alex Greene (order #4281056)

29

8

of a brutal day’s combat, the gladiatorial stable reckoned to have been the most successful
by the laws of the arena was allowed to nominate a unique match. Any takers then came
forward. It was not every day that such a call was answered, and as often as not the crowd
were expecting the worst. This day, however, they were not disappointed.
It was to be crossbows and short swords. And little else. Still, that didn’t matter in the
slightest to Hjeraldo, who, as he awaited his opponent, knew he made a splendid sight,
particularly for the noble ladies in the crowd with whom he soon expected to be a firm
favourite. His stable master, Kai Pistorius, had been saving him specially for such a fight
as this, and Hjeraldo had absolutely no intention of missing the opportunity. The day had
not gone well for the famous stable master and two of his new troupe of gladiators were now
dire wolf meat in the catacombs below. Pistorius wanted a victory, and the last one of the
day was oft the best remembered. If this went well, Hjeraldo knew he’d have the choice of a
dozen noble beds within the week, and Pistorius was legendary for the manner in which he
favoured those fighters who had pleased him.

The Hypogeum of Trallios

Although born in a country with a limited interest in blood sports, from childhood
the future King Trallios had been fascinated by the idea of the sands of death. This
mostly came about from his education. His father’s grip on the throne was by no means
secure and for his own safety the young Trallios was sent abroad to be schooled. The
land where he was instructed was very different to his home for it was a virile, martial
land where gladiatorial combat was much admired and followed. Trallios spent much
of his spare time watching and congregating with the gladiators themselves. Despite
such inappropriateness, he also began instruction in the gladiatorial arts and in the
process became hugely smitten with a gladiator named Jamuga. Needless to say such an
affiliation could not be kept silent indefinitely and word eventually got back to Trallios’
father, who, still struggling to maintain his own position, could have done well without
the scandal of a delinquent teenage heir. One day on his arrival at the arena, Trallios
found his entry barred and worse, he saw that Jamuga was rostered to fight Sparg, an
ogre of terrifying repute. The conclusion proved to be foregone.
Initially heartbroken, Trallios continued his studies impassively, nurturing a deep hatred
for his own class, seeing them and in particular his father, as responsible for the death of
his paramour. He began planning a great and destructive revenge. However, before this
could happen, his father was murdered and his homeland thrown into turmoil. Aged
only twenty, Trallios was obliged to return to his kingdom to wrest control from the
rebels who had assassinated his father. It did not occur to Trallios this was the end he
had planned himself. In fact, he was greatly annoyed that he’d had his designs thwarted.
With a large force of mercenaries brought from his adopted land, Trallios returned
with a ruthlessness his home had not seen in several generations. Giving no quarter,
he crushed his enemies with an efficiency built out of his gladiatorial mindset. After
the final victory, he discovered that he had thousands of prisoners, including the clique
of rebel generals, and instead of simply executing them on the field an idea began to
formulate. Why not treat his conquering soldiers to a victory games?

30

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

The prisoners were made to fight to the death in Trallios’ camp, the survivors buried
alive to teach his subjects once and for all the meaning of rebellion. After the butchery
had ended, Trallios felt a vacuum within himself he quickly identified. His own capital
had no arena of its own and this he intended to remedy. This would be no ordinary
arena though. Trallios had inherited a vast fortune, made greater by the fortunes
he seized from the estates of his defeated enemies. The process of creating a unique
arena soon began. Trallios scoured the world for the greatest designers, offering small
fortunes for the best ideas. He knew himself what the external appearance would be.
The royal tombs of his land were tall, stepped pyramids, built with the mathematical
precision for which his land was justly famous. Trallios felt nothing but contempt for
such intellectualities but he fully intended to use them for his own ends. Knowing the
shape of the exterior, Trallios needed the design of the interior itself before he could
finalise the concept. The answer came from one of his own court architects - an irony,
considering the expense incurred bringing the greatest designers available to his palace.
Karthus, a great lover of the theatre, came up with a notion which would appease the
sophisticated populous whilst at the same time giving Trallios’ new ideas full vent. The
king himself could not have given a fig less for his own population’s desires but the
design was so unique he immediately approved it.
Karthus’ idea was as simple as it was ingenious. He would construct the arena in two
halves, mounted back to back on a pivot. Partitions were built to block the sound
between what Karthus intended to be two gigantic theatrical stages, able to put on
the greatest plays and performances simultaneously. Then, by simply swivelling on
the pivot, the whole thing would become a vast gladiatorial arena, with the stages and
partitions easily removed. The whole construction, made of wood, would take three
years to complete. Seeing the design, one of Karthus’ rivals indignantly pointed out
that the whole thing looked like two ships on pivots. The insult was a weak one but
the notion it put into Trallios’ head, after he’d had the reproaching architect beheaded,
did not dissipate. The whole arena could possibly be flooded so as to stage mock naval
battles, the likes of which Trallios’ had heard of, but never personally seen. Karthus,
remembering his decapitated colleague, decided this vague idea should be taken
seriously.
On the outskirts of the capital was a small, almost circular lake, and Karthus drew up
plans to build the whole arena over the lake, turning it into an underground reservoir.
He pointed out that such a foundation would be inherently unstable but Trallios
seemed wholly unperturbed, brushing away concerns with a wave of a regal hand. He
would see to these problems, the king assured Karthus. The same reply came when
Karthus pointed out that the extravagant exterior would take twenty years, even with
willing labour. He, Trallios, would see to it.
What none knew was that following his devastation at the perceived murder of Jamuga,
the future king had turned to dark gods of far off nations, rejecting all the beliefs of
his homeland. Maleficent magicks would enable him to construct his dream and in
a fraction of the time human hands would take. He installed a number of flagitious

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

31

8

wizards in his palace, which steadily became more of a temple dedicated to evil.
Rumours of such bestiality reached the ears of the public but there was little they could
do. With the revolt crushed, a large force of the mercenaries guarded Trallios. There
was no standing army and no sign of his vast wealth running out. The people remained
silent, keen neither to experience a second revolt nor the wrath of their monarch.
Trallios realised the need not to overly antagonise his population, whom he hoped to
draw into his own depredations en masse, so he allowed Karthus’ human workers to
complete the interior arena design in the three years allowed. When it was complete,
Trallios had the dimensions he needed for his open-topped pyramid. It would ensconce
the whole construction, leaving it open to the seasons and inside, row after row of
wooden benches would angle down towards the arena. Entrances were planned at the
base and half way up the sides, with flights of stairs allowing travel. The interior of the
pyramid was a platform of earth and rubble, with an outer shell of stone, painted the
traditional amaranth that marked the kings’ tombs.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

The nine stepped levels each provided standing room for armed guards and inside the
walls, between one of the sides and the spectators’ benches, Trallios ordered a crypt to
be built. On top of the tomb a five-ton slab of stone was rested, held up by massive
wooden pegs, awaiting the occupant whose likeness was already mysteriously engraved
on the top. It was his intention that when death finally came for him, he would be
buried inside his arena and the top enclosed, entombing him with the spirits of his
beloved gladiators. Only Karthus and his construction team were aware of this plan,
and only Karthus’ life was spared on its completion.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

During the days that followed, the human and monstrous workers earmarked for the
project did their work but at night, away from prying eyes, the demons to whom
Trallios had aligned himself continued, working at an inhuman speed to see the great
pyramid completed in two years instead of the expected twenty. All knew that fell
magic was behind such an unearthly accomplishment, yet none dared question it. After
all, it was reasoned, now that Trallios’ will was assuaged, would life not go back to
normality, and with a splendid arena no less?
In essence the people were right. The inaugural festival of games lasted forty days and
saw every form of spectacle known to man. Trallios inducted his people into the thrill
of the games, starting with chariot races, then gladiatorial combats, and ending in the
flooding of the whole arena to allow a gigantic naval battle involving a dozen ships
and five thousand sailors. By the end, the sands of death had been ingrained onto the
hearts of his people, and they clamoured for more. Trallios obliged, and soon his great
Hypogeum became famed throughout the world.
Because of the nature of the design, no subterranean tunnel system, common in city
arenas, was possible. Accordingly all the contestants, human and otherwise, had to be
brought into the arena from the massive encampment which sprung up outside. At
first constructed of wood, these buildings quickly evolved into stone as it was realised
the installation would be permanent. The Hypogeum and its surrounding buildings
became almost a town unto themselves and before long the whole complex was closed
off by a tall palisade patrolled by Trallios’ taciturn guards. Entry, other than on specific
games days was strictly limited and the king seemingly spent more time amongst the
swelling buildings of this conurbation than he did in his own palace. Rumours of evil
goings on and numinous sounds ensured that the patrolling guards got little in the way
of disturbance.
By day, however, Trallios immersed himself fully in the sands of death. Feeling only
contempt for human life, he wanted nothing more than to be revered as the genius
behind the games. He spent hours coming up with new and original concepts and in
this he ironically gained the favour of his own people who, as the years passed, came
to relish the games as much as did their king. Rarely did the split stages get used for
anything as mundane as a play and Karthus looked on dejectedly as the crowds were
entertained by a ‘hunt’ on one side whilst matched pairs duelled on the other. This was
not what he had had in mind at all.
Trallios rarely saw his old architect though and when he did, he certainly would not
have taken any notice of the fellow’s feelings. Trallios lived for one man, and that man
was Trallios. He had reached forty without taking a wife, preferring to spend time
with his gladiators. On occasion he would even fight in the arena himself, though
it was widely believed none would dare harm the king, and his well-choreographed
bouts always ended in victory. He even took to fighting various beasts and creatures,
alone or with groups of his favourite fighters, although it was made certain in advance
the victim was suitably impaired by the administration of debilitating drugs or slow
poisons. He was not, after all, a fool.

34

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

That Trallios had been able to corrupt the core of an entire nation within the space of a
single generation spoke poorly of the veneer of civilisation they had considered so firm.
However, he was not able to bend them completely to his will, and with the new-found
love of the games came an aesthetic nature which meant the vanquished always stood a
good chance of survival, much to Trallios’ annoyance. He always liked to see the loser
slain but, even seated in his golden chair on the royal rostrum, he felt obliged to adhere
to the majority verdict. It was the tradition, after all.
Trallios, having an organisational mind, demanded the same of his games. He
introduced a standard opening ceremony whence the gladiators, on entering,
completed a full circuit of the arena before halting in front of the royal dais. There they
bowed in greeting before opening their arms in salute. An official would then inspect
the weapons and confirm to the king all was in order. On special occasions, the king
would come down from the rostrum himself to do the honours or if he was fighting,
then he would graciously allow the official to examine him as well, much to the crowd’s
pleasure.
With the precautions he took and the protective magicks with which he was constantly
surrounded, Trallios lived well into his sixties before fate overtook him. Seeing his
once virile body beginning to deteriorate, Trallios enquired of his demonologists what
might be done to alleviate his death. Recklessly it was decided he should be possessed
with a great demon, to enhance his life indefinitely. The idea appealed to Trallios and
preparations quickly began for the ceremony. The building in question was one of those
near the Hypogeum to which only a few had access, and it took all of his demonologists
gathered together to call the demon from the infernal planes. Had they not erred with
the demon’s true name, the gods alone know what the result might have been. As it
was, the creature arrived and took the opportunity to slay all those who had falsely
called upon it. It then took possession of Trallios, drinking his thoughts and torturing
his body, mind and soul.
They found his mutilated remains in the centre of the arena, the sands of death never
having been so aptly named. Only his head was intact, perversely left to show all whom
it had been. Of the killer, there was no trace. The same day, the bloodbath in the
nearby idolatry was found and so appalling was the sight that the building was deemed
irrecoverable and destroyed. So perished Trallios, the last of his line.
Yet he left an endowment to his people. Whilst they retained their aesthetic character, they
were also unable to relinquish the games to which they had become habituated. A ruling
council of nobles replaced the monarchy and the games continued as before, but in such a
manner that the Hypogeum became the very kernel of the nation. Famed throughout the
world, any aficionado of the arena aims to visit the Hypogeum at least once.
She stood in the entrance to the arena, every nerve as taught as a bowstring. The elves
flanked her, chains linking her wrists to theirs. The pair reminded her of frightened children
though she was not sure whether the impression was caused by their delicate features or the
look of awe-struck fear perfectly mirrored on each of their faces.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

35

8

She had no time to prepare them for what they were about to experience. On the other side
of the massive gate waited well-armed, well-trained fighters intent on killing anything that
stepped through the portal. She took a deep breath and closed her eyes, mind racing to form
a plan that would keep her alive long enough to get a decent weapon. At least her feet were
not chained.
Just as the trio stepped onto the Sands, she felt the chains at her wrists go slack, the manacles
swinging empty by her knees. The nimble elven twins bolted in opposite directions across the
arena as she let out an elated battle cry and gripped the heavy chains in either fist, swinging
them in fast arcs to get the feel of their weight. Today was going to be a very good day to
die… for someone else.
As the small column crested the brow of the frozen hill, they were at last able to look down
upon their goal. The town was unimpressive, to say the least. Kai Pistorius just hoped his
man’s information was good. There had been a war near this place. More like in this place,
Pistorius thought, judging by the ramshackle state of the buildings. There was no wall to
speak of, and the size would hardly merit more than a large village back home. He shrugged
within the copious furs around his shoulders, nudging his horse forward. For the past 300
miles he had ridden in the comfortable calash which was now returned to the rear of the
convoy. Image was everything, after all.
The stiff northerly sea breeze whipped up the canvass sides of the prison wagon, exposing
the bars and looking like the sails might on the un-rigged longships in what passed for a
harbour in these parts.
This had better be worth it, he thought.
They were greeted as they entered the town and, accompanied by several suitably imposing
local soldiery, taken to a large wooden stockade which had been hidden from their
approaching view. It smelt disgusting. In fact, it was a familiar smell to Pistorius, and one
that made his heart well up with hope. It was the smell of beaten men, and beaten men
made excellent gladiators. Also, they came cheap.
The negotiations had been harder than he had hoped, but no more than he had expected.
The local warlord was a big fish around these parts, and Pistorius was obliged to act suitably
impressed. Most of the prisoners were former warriors. Nothing special. Certainly not worth
the trip. He bought five anyway. Two humans, a dwarf, a halfling and an orc. The orc was
overpriced, but the crowd liked them.
Only as he was leaving did he catch sight of the small pit in the corner. Odd, he thought,
turning to the northman. ‘What’s that for?’
‘It’s where we put the really bad ones,’ his escort said.
‘Really bad?’

36

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

The northman nodded in reply.
‘Got one in there now?’
Another nod. Pistorius changed direction, and walked to the edge. As his shadow passed over
the cavity it was greeted with a savage scream.
‘Half mad, that one,’ said the escort. ‘Killed two of my men with his bare hands. He’ll die
in there.’
‘Oh, I think not,’ contradicted the stable manager, his mind already thinking ahead. This
journey was suddenly looking a whole lot better. ‘What’s his name?’
The northman paused, frowning. ‘They call him Tharg.’
The screeching of the iron portcullis at the opposite end of the arena marked the impending
arrival of Tharg’s opponent, and the young gladiator’s confidence faltered for a second when
he saw the heavy crossbow carried so comfortably by the human female. With his weakness
for women, it was lucky that she looked like the far end of a troll. At least there would be
no distractions.
It did mean a change of plans though. He had to assume she knew what she was doing,
which meant he was outmatched in terms of power. Likely he’d go down before she would,
and that wouldn’t do at all. However, martial skills were not the only talents that Pistorius
drilled into his gladiators. He believed in psychology, and he hammered it into his fighters
that a quick mind was as important as any steel. Now he’d see.
Tharg began to laugh. Loudly.
The female gladiator looked up in surprise. She had been adjusting the tension on her own
crossbow, awaiting the trumpet call to action. Now, a mere hundred feet away, this oiled
buffoon was laughing. Laughing at her. Rage began to burn inside her. Cireel, for that was
her name, searched her dull mind for a response, but none was forthcoming. The School of
Amazons had not trained her for this. Now, even the crowd was silenced, stunned by her
opponent who seemed to be collapsing in paroxysms of laughter – at her expense!
Hjeraldo surreptitiously glanced at his opponent as he continued his fakery. He could
practically see the fumes escaping her head. One more push should do it.
‘By all the gods! She has the face of jackal and the body of a baboon!’ Tharg shouted to the
crowd. As one they burst into fits of laughter themselves. It was too much for Cireel. She
dropped the still-loaded crossbow, drew her short sword and charged across the arena.
She saw the bolt with her right eye alone. It was buried in her left eye, lodged up to the
shaft. As she collapsed onto the sands, Cireel saw her vanquisher had already turned and was
receiving the adulation of the crowd.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

37

8

the gladiator campaign
This sourcebook provides a wealth of information dedicated to Games Masters for
integrating arenas and gladiatorial combat into their campaign worlds. The five
example arenas later in the book can be dropped into any suitable town or city with the
bare minimum of effort on the part of the Games Master and whilst the construction
of a grand arena may have a powerful impact upon the city it dominates, sufficient
information is given on easing the transition. Players themselves will readily adopt the
new weapons and feats even if they never set foot within an arena themselves and many
may just be dying for an excuse to purchase and use one of the chariots.
There are two principle ways in which arenas may be introduced into an existing
campaign world – as scenario hooks and plot devices in regular adventures, or as a fullbodied gladiator campaign. In this chapter, we will take a look at both.

The Regular Campaign
The standard party of magic users, warriors, healers, urban or wilderness characters
may happen across an arena in any city they visit – or even whilst adventuring under
the earth, as exemplified by the orcish arena. Such arenas are best introduced when
the party visits such a settlement for the very first time as then they can explore the
social dynamics of an arena and its effect upon a culture as outsiders, not needing
the benefit of the information within this sourcebook immediately, but discovering
it as required.
Such a party is likely to, initially at least, stay on the outskirts of the arena and its
many characters. They may be hired by stable masters to cause trouble for rivals, or
by someone distressed at the enslavement of a family member who is due to be thrust
into the arena with no training. Holy characters or those with a strict moral code may
have a serious problem with a society that enslaves part of its population to provide
lethal entertainment, though they had better be of high level if they seek to do anything
about such concerns. The nobles, arena managers and stable masters will be loathed to
suffer any interruption to their profitable status quo.
As the party sinks further into the callous and cynical society surrounding any arena,
they will begin to learn of the relationships between those who run the games and,
players being what they are, will inevitably run afoul of many powerful people, whether
intentionally or not. This will occur even if they do no more than accept straight offers
of employment. By aiding one stable master, they will irritate his rivals. By taking an
arena manager as a patron, they will possibly gain the enmity of all the stable masters.
If they perform any arena-related tasks for an ambitious noble, they are set to become

38

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

wanted men by almost everyone else involved in the running of the arena. From this
initial starting point, they may well be captured and enslaved by the enemies they
make. Such parties are, of course, best disposed of within the arena itself, leading to a
full-bodied gladiator campaign as detailed later. Alternatively, quick-witted parties may
succeed in confounding the enemies they create. Those who choose not to leave the city
in short order may begin to fully embrace the world of the arena, either stepping on to
the sands of death as freemen or setting up their own expensive but highly profitable
stable. If this is achieved, you can be sure that many established stable masters will take
nefarious action against any newcomers who threaten to upset their delicate balance of
politics and profit.
When it comes to player characters running their own stable, you might like to
consider using the Sands of Death game as a basic framework with which to structure
the running of a stable. The only word of caution is to always remember you are
running a role-playing game, whereas Sands of Death does nothing more than
portray games days in an abstract fashion. Always be ready to disregard the rules
presented in Sands of Death in the interests of both your main story line and keeping
the players off-balance and unsure of quite what will happen next. In between these
games days, keep the players busy with rival stable masters, awesome gladiators in
other stables and corrupt arena managers. Such scenarios may or may not hold the
players’ enjoyment for a great length of time, but they will certainly be good for a
few gaming sessions.

Scenario Hooks and Ideas
Below are presented just a few initial ideas for adventures with which draw a regular
adventuring party into the world of arena combat and entertainment.
•	 Captured by orcs, the players are forced to fight for their freedom in the arena.
•	 A tearful young girl begs the party to free her father who has been enslaved and is
set to fight in the arena the next day (note: young girls are always well-used in this
fashion – make them older or male and most players will expect payment).
•	 Caught red-handed in the midst of some crime, the players are quickly sent to a
stable master desperate to provide gladiators for tomorrow’s battle.
•	 Enjoying a quiet drink in a favoured tavern after vanquishing a marauding
hobgoblin tribe, the players are approached by a weasel-faced man promising good
pay if only they cause a gladiator, who has been annoying his own employer with
continued victories, to disappear. Permanently. With extreme prejudice.
•	 A rather harried-looking arena manager puts a general call out to adventurers
prepared to procure rare and dangerous creatures such as carrion crawlers, hydras
and trolls. Rival adventuring parties may also be interested in the large rewards,
however, and could seek to intimidate or remove rivals.
•	 The local thieves’ guild has been taking a keen interest in the arena of late, fixing
games and silencing troublesome stable masters. The players get mixed up in these
machinations and are encouraged to sell themselves into slavery as gladiators to get
to the heart of the plot.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

39

8

The Gladiator Campaign
A full-blown gladiator campaign will involve all the player characters becoming
enslaved or, more likely, have them start in servitude, forced to fight every games day
in the arena. Such a campaign may well not last for years of playing time but it can
certainly provide many sessions of tense action and easily serve as the foundation for a
more regular campaign – by the time the party has survived many matches within the
arena, they will be truly awesome warriors, capable of tackling any evil in the world
once freedom is gained.
In a gladiator campaign, the initial choices for characters will likely be very restrictive
compared to what they are normally used to. After all, the action takes place in the arena,
so characters had better be able to fight well! This is, in itself, no bad thing. Focussed
campaigns of this nature are relatively easy for a Games Master to write and players with
immediately defined goals are generally happier than those left to wander aimlessly.
We would recommend that starting characters are limited to fighters, barbarians,
rogues and monks. Spellcasters, even priests and shamans/druids, are likely to be made
to suffer for their special powers where they may be better off concentrating on pure
combat abilities. There need be no restrictions on race but players wishing to take
halflings should be warned how tough life is likely to be for them. However, we would
also direct Games Masters to review the possibility of starting all player characters off
with the slave option. The use of the slave start can really hammer home to the players
the position their characters are in and make for a truly memorable campaign. After
all, imagine a great barbarian king, holding dominion over an entire nation. Though
a bloodied killing machine now, he began his life as a slave before entering the arena.
Sound familiar? Think you can persuade your players to accept the slave option now?
I knew you could.

Breaking the Shackles
The ultimate goal for the gladiator campaign has to be the gaining of freedom, the
escape from slavery. Until that is achieved, players will always be ultimately subject to
the whim of others and while they may become incredibly skilled gladiators and fulfil
various plans and ambitions in the meantime, their destiny will never be truly theirs.
This can take one of two forms – at relatively low levels, they may simply gain the
opportunity to escape and begin new lives by running far from the arena. Alternatively,
they may become true celebrities on the sands of death and get into the position of
either leading a massed slave revolt or directly challenging the position of a jealous city
ruler who would just as soon see them dead. Again, I am sure this is all fairly familiar.
The trick in directing such a campaign is to forever put obstacles in the way of your
players until you are ready to release them into the rest of the world. Rivalries between
other gladiators and stables are obvious plot devices and the attentions of an interested
and powerful noble are always likely to provide a great deal of trouble for the players,
whether he wants to help or hinder their careers. Gladiators with a high Fame score
will quickly find their celebrity status brings its own problems as they become a prime

40

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

target for opponents, rivals, assassins and those wishing to profit from either their
victory or defeat.

Eternal Combat

One of the first criticisms levelled at gladiator campaigns is that, surely, it revolves
around pure combat. Well, maybe not. You need only have, say, one match per gaming
session and the fact that the more elaborate matches, such as Lord of the Pyramid, can
provide over an hour of fast, intense gaming time makes this kind of campaign very
attractive to a Games Master with limited time to prepare for adventures.
Outside of the arena though, players can be given more than enough to occupy their
time, even whilst enslaved. Established gladiators in a stable are likely to take a dim
view to newcomers who cover themselves in glory. Once they become the top dogs of
the stable, gladiators with other masters are going to begin taking an interest in the
players. Rivalries are an important plot device to introduce early on – have a gladiator
give a player a real kicking in the arena and yet spare him when mercy is asked for. That
should be enough for the NPC to earn the enmity of most players. Scenarios can also
arise through the shadier dealings of the players’ stable master and the arena manager,
and they may find initially fair odds stacked heavily against them within the arena if
plans and deals begin to go awry.
At the end of the day, such people as Stanley Kubrick, Ridley Scott and Dino de
Laurentiis have made popular, indeed block-busting, movies based on gladiators. There
need be nothing boring or monotonous in such a focussed campaign and you have the
works of these great directors to provide readily accessible source material. Try out a
gladiator campaign, even if only as the base for more regular adventuring – your players
will thank you for it.
‘Rosanellwyia and Gildena.’ Two sets of dark eyes peered at her expectantly.
She made a face. Her mouth seemed to refuse to properly pronounce the elves names though
they had repeated them a thousand times. ‘I will call you Rose and Gilda. You will call me
Hamli. Short names are better used on the sands. I’ll not have my hair trimmed at the neck
for trying to remember how to pronounce your names.’
Hamli winced as the healer dabbed salve on her shoulder. ‘I overheard the stable master.
We’re slated for battle tomorrow. If we work together, we’ll live to see the sun set. Act scared.
Run, scream, pretend to swoon, then stab them in the back or just under the ribs while
they’re gloating and posing for the crowd. Use their ego against them.’
‘And will you scream and run?’ Rose tilted her head questioningly.
Hamli smiled. ‘Yes… directly at the centre of their lines. The contrast should confuse them
long enough to take out a good number before they understand what is happening.’
Rose and Gilda looked at each other then back to the human. ‘We think perhaps you are not
so much a barbarian as they seem to believe.’
Alex Greene (order #4281056)

41

8

characters of the arena
The following professions all make for good starting points for characters in a gladiator
campaign.

Slave

The practice of slavery has been outlawed in the majority of truly civilised nations
but there are still many slavers who operate covertly in the shadowy underworld or
by the leave of corrupt lawmakers. However, the presence of a large gladiatorial arena
often necessitates the use of slaves to supply a continuous source of combatants for
the sands. In such towns and cities, slavery is deemed a part of everyday life, the
removal of freedom from another sentient being taken for granted. Indeed, one may
measure wealth and status simply through the number of slaves owned and outside
of the blood-stained arena, a slave’s life may be deemed safe, if monotonous. Despite
common perceptions amongst freemen from other nations, slaves are rarely treated
poorly as they are just too expensive for their owners to discard carelessly.
Cultural
Background
All

Common Skill Bonuses
Pick Three Common at +5%
Pick Two Common at +10%

Advanced Skills Magic
Pick One
Any based on
GM approval

Gladiator Champion

There are few as famed or renowned in any major city as the gladiator champion. His
is the name spoken in taverns by drunks, around the dinner table in noble society and
in the streets by the masses. Children can even be seen emulating him. Everyone talks
of his latest match in the arena, where he strode forth on to the sands of death to claim
yet another victory for his stable master.
Whilst a fearsome warrior in his own right, the gladiator champion has honed his skills
and abilities to one end alone – victory within the arena. Sheer slaughter takes second
place for this true expert. Specialised in engaging the crowd as well as performing
amazing displays of courage and skill, he may seem a little out of place if freedom is
ever attained and he starts travelling with a party of adventurers to slay orcs. If the
truth be told though, few gladiator champions look forward to possible freedom. Most
are hooked upon the roar of the crowd at their entrance, the feeling of thousands of
eyes watching their every sword stroke, and the unparalleled feeling of victory when
yet another opponent is vanquished to the ecstatic cries of the mob. Whether fighting
blind, unarmed, chained or on the back of a speeding chariot, there is no field of

42

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

combat he cannot hope to excel in. There are none who can truly compete with the
experienced gladiator champion whilst on his home ground – the sands of the arena.
Cultural
Background
All

Advanced
Common Skill Bonuses Skills
Athletics +5%, Brawn
Lore (Tactics)
+15%, Evade +15%,
Lore (Arena)
Resilience +10%

Magic
Any based on GM
approval

Pick any three Combat
Styles appropriate to your
culture, receiving them at
+10%

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

43

8

Beast Handler
There are many types of specialised gladiator to be found within the arena but few
can excite the crowd as much as the beast handler – not for what he is, or what he can
do but for the wild and fantastic creatures he brings with him onto the sands. From
wild cats to the huge and truly dangerous manticore and hydra, the beast handler
delights the crowd with his charges, getting them to perform amazing tricks that defy
imagination, when they are not tearing gladiators to pieces. Such creatures are usually
sent into the arena alone to fight but occasionally the beast handler will stand beside
his beloved creature, fighting alongside it in a display of devastating teamwork. It is
true that it is often the creature that gets the notice of the crowd rather than the beast
handler himself but then, few veteran beast handlers truly seem to care.
Cultural
Background
All

Common Skill Bonuses
First Aid +5%, Persistence Evade
+5%, Resilience +5%

Advanced Skills
+10% Lore (Arena)
Lore (Tactics)
Lore (Monsters)

Magic
Any based
on GM
approval

Pick any two Combat Styles
appropriate to your culture,
receiving them at +10%

Charioteer
There are few matches that can grab the attention of the crowd so much as the chariot
race. Fast, exciting and utterly lethal to the novice gladiator, chariots may be the most
deadly devices to enter the arena. Two or more charging horses pulling a lightweight
chariot, sporting massive scythes and bearing skilled charioteers are a truly awesome
weapon. To those who dare regularly compete in chariot races, the rewards may
well outweigh such risks for a successful charioteer will find his career in the arena
guaranteed, with the crowd always ready to welcome him with shouts of bloodlust and
adulation.
Cultural
Background
All

Common Skill Bonuses
Drive +10%, Brawn +10%,
Evade +5%, Resilience +5%
Pick any three Combat Styles
appropriate to your culture,
receiving them at +10%

44

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

Advanced Skills
Lore (Tactics)
Lore (Arena)
Lore (Chariot
Races)

Magic
Any based on
GM approval

8

gladiatorial combat
The debate is endless and rages on in taverns and around the dinner tables of the upper
classes. Who is the superior combatant? The noble knight? Or the lowly gladiator?
Arguments are put forward and dismissed after much speculation. Surely the knight
is the greater fighter, for he must battle against a wide range of man and beast, for
causes great and honoured, in defence of his nation. No, no, comes the retort – a
gladiator fights just as wide a range of enemies and yet must do so whilst constantly
handicapped by someone else’s choice of weapon and armour. And furthermore, he
does it constantly, each and every day of his life. To the true knight or gladiator, such
speculation is pointless to the extreme. Each knows that there is little difference in raw
combat, wherever it takes place and however it is fought. You must thrust your weapon
into another’s flesh before they are able to do it to you. That, at the end of the day,
is all that matters. The differences of armour, weapon and even outlook are minor by
comparison.
It is recognised, however, that the gladiators of the arena are truly remarkable fighters,
far more than the mere entertainers the common man may presume them to be. There
are many techniques and ploys that seem to be only learnt through the butchery of
the arena and any gladiator who survives for some length of time is going to be in
possession of skills that are likely to impress the hardiest of adventuring warriors.
Games Masters may want to look at putting more emphasis on the spectacle of combat
in a Gladiatorial Campaign and many of the Combat Manoeuvres on p129 of the
Legend Core Rulebook are perfect for this. Gladiator matches are brutal affairs and the
Legend combat system models this very well. There’s nothing more the crowd loves
than to see a hero step up to the mark, only to have their life ended abruptly by a
newcomer and in a fountain of gore at that.
Don’t be afraid to describe the combat in cinematic detail or even fudge those results
in the player’s favour, after all, its no fun for them if they’re killed right out of the
gate and who wants to roll up character after character. There’s a fine line between
entertainment and frustration which is easy to cross in a Gladiatorial Campaign.

Types of Matches
As well an ensuring the smooth running of the arena and the stable masters, it is
the responsibility of the arena manager to provide the greatest entertainment for the
people, to grant a spectacle guaranteed to live on in memory. All manner of diversions
and events are planned, from pre-match performers to trained animals capable
of astounding tricks. All this, however, revolves around the main attractions – the
Alex Greene (order #4281056)

45

8

gladiators who walk onto the sands of death to fight for the pleasure of the crowd, all
the while knowing it may be their last combat.
The crowd are both cynical and jaded though and an arena manager must be a creative
individual with few scruples, as well as a consummate showman forever seeking newer
and deadlier challenges for the gladiators. Throughout a day’s games, matches will
become ever more elaborate and trying, each a spectacle better than the one before,
building up to a grand finale that sates the blood thirst of the crowd until the next day.
Presented here are just a few examples of the types of matches the crowd can expect
to see in any one day. The Games Master is encouraged to devise new and interesting
matches for his players, be they mere spectators or actual gladiators. Each type of
match is described along with details governing initial set up and any special rules
to be applied. If a match is listed as having random weapons and armour, a Games
Master should select suitable weaponry for the gladiators participating in the combat.
Alternatively, the table on page 79 may be used to generate random arms and armour.
A few also have additional rules for use in the Sands of Death game.

One on One

This is the simplest kind of gladiatorial fight and, indeed, for many pit fights is the
only show on offer. Two combatants start in the arena, fighting until one is dead or
yields. This type of match is generally only used to warm the crowd up for bigger events
though it is also the only match of choice to pit two renowned gladiator champions
against one another. One variation of this match is to have several One on One fights
taking place in the arena simultaneously. When a victor emerges from one fight, he
will wait until another fight has been completed and then engage the survivor. This
continues until only one gladiator still stands having defeated the rest. This variation
is very bloody but is also a good way for novice gladiators to make their mark and gain
the attention of the crowd. A further variation is to have matched pairs enter the arena,
working in concert to defeat every other pair.
Set up: Each gladiator will start within ten feet of his opponent. In multiple One on
One combats, each individual fight will take place at least twenty feet away from any
other. If matched pairs are being used, gladiators need not necessarily stay within a
certain distance of one another, but they must completely defeat a pair before moving
onto another, just as if they were single gladiators in an ordinary One on One.
Weapons & Armour: Random. Melee only.

46

Sands of Death: Each stable will put forward a single gladiator to enter the arena.
These will then be paired off against their first opponent, with the two stables with
the highest Fame score fighting each other. The two stables with the next highest Fame
scores are paired off together, and so on. No gladiator is permitted to attack another if
they are already engaged in combat. If there are an odd number of stables, the player
with the lowest Fame score may either opt to not compete or face a suitable gladiator.
Such a non-player gladiator may be controlled by any player not currently fighting
against the one being attacked. This may result in the non-player gladiator effectively

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

switching hands throughout a match as he is passed on to one player, then another. If
a paired match is rolled for, stables put forward two gladiators to fight side by side but
otherwise follow the rules above.

One on Many

A popular match with the crowd, especially if a favoured gladiator champion is taking
on several lesser combatants. The lone gladiator will either start in the centre of the
arena, flanked or even surrounded by his opponents or, alternatively, will engage in
combat as soon as he enters the arena.
Set up: The lone gladiator may choose whether to start in the centre of the arena or
begin fighting as soon as he enters. The opposing gladiators start at least ten feet away
from him or his place of entrance. The total levels of the opposing gladiators must be
within one level of the character level of the lone gladiator.
Weapons & Armour: Random. Melee only.
Sands of Death: One randomly chosen stable
master presents a single gladiator with which to
face those of all the other stables.

Chain Gang

This is a vicious type of fight of which few
gladiators truly master and is normally
reserved for those stepping onto the sands of
death for the very first time. Gladiators are
paired and chained together, fighting against
other chained pairs. The length of chain used is
normally very short, being of no more than four
or five feet, and thus greatly restricts a gladiator’s
manoeuvrability. Chain gangs have to be either adept
at working together in perfect consort, a very rare
occurrence, or one gladiator must be strong enough to
completely dominate the other on his chain.
Set up: Each pair will start no closer than ten feet from any
other.
Weapons & Armour: Random. Melee only.
Special Rules: Only weapons wielded in one
hand may be used, as the hand
chained is effectively
useless for

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

47

8

combat. A shield may be taken instead of a weapon. Gladiators on a chain gang will
always take a penalty of -10% to any dexterous action.
If the two gladiators chained together opt to co-operate in the arena, they may otherwise
fight as normal. However, opposing Resilience tests must be made to determine which
direction the chained pair move in if the gladiators are not co-operating fully for any
reason (one may strongly disagree about attacking an ogre gladiator, for example).
The winner will decide where they move, though it will be at half of their lowest
base movement rate. In addition, if one of the gladiators is attacked, he may move
his chained partner to receive the blow instead – again, an opposing Resilience test is
required for success.
Sands of Death: Each stable will put forward two chained gladiators to enter the arena
as a pair – players may assume that such gladiators have been trained to co-operate
when chained together.

Mage Killer

A rare show, as few mages will waste their time by setting foot inside an arena, but
one guaranteed to amaze the crowd with huge explosions of magical energies as one
or more gladiators attempt to defeat a solitary wizard or sorcerer. They must traverse
the entire length of the arena to close with their enemy, all the while dodging the most
powerful offensive spells the wizard has at his disposal. Few stable masters enjoy the
prospect of sending their well trained gladiators against a competent mage but most
are tightly bound by their contracts to the arena. Sometimes wizards with a grudge will
agree to accept payment to resolve their disputes and thus an exciting mage duel may
be on offer for the crowd though this is rarer still.
Set up: Combatants start at opposite ends of the arena, as far apart as is possible. The
spellcaster is forbidden to use spells with large areas of effect, those that guarantee an
automatic hit or those that may potentially injure the crowd. Mercy may never be
appealed for in mage killer matches.
Weapons & Armour: Gladiator’s free choice. Melee only.
Sands of Death: If a Mage Killer match is rolled for in Sands of Death, stable masters
must each submit one gladiator of their choice to the arena. The gladiators should be
chosen to match that of the mage or sorcerer they’ll face in the arena, though some
Mage Killer matches are setup so that the wizard is the most powerful being in the
arena at the time – these are usually the most bloody and vicious of matches, with the
mage torn to pieces at the end and numerous gladiators sacrificed to accomplish this.

Beasts & Monsters

This match is often arranged in an identical manner to One on One or One on Many but
the single gladiator is replaced by a vicious creature captured from the wild and trained
to fight in the arena. The crowd delights in such matches for this is usually the only time
they may ever see creatures such as a manticore or hydra. A rarer variation of this match

48

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

Initiative
Within the arena, Initiative is rolled for at the start of every new combat, rather than
at the beginning of every match. For example, in a One on One match detailed below,
each pair of opposing gladiators roll for initiative as normal, but it is re-rolled when a
gladiator defeats his opponent and attacks another victorious combatant.

will pit one monster against another but whilst such a fight may sate even the most
bloodthirsty spectator, few can truly enjoy the spectacle without true gladiators taking
part as well. Occasionally, a beast handler may accompany the monster into the arena.
Set up: As for One on One or One on Many, depending on whether one gladiator is to
face the creature or several. Creatures capable of flight are clipped or crippled, denying
them this ability in order to protect the crowd and prevent their easy escape. Mercy
may never be appealed for in a match involving monsters unless the beast handler is
alive and present.
Weapons & Armour: Random.
Sands of Death: A monster is randomly chosen from those stables who own one,
accompanied by a beast handler from the same stable if one is available. The other
stables must put forward gladiators to face the creature but their combined character
levels may not exceed the creature’s hit dice, plus the level of any beast handler. This
may result in one or more stables being forced not to fight. The player owning the
monster may move and control it as normal.
If no stable has a monster, select a monster from the list and use the rules from Monsters
of Legend. When this creature is faced with multiple gladiators, it will start by attacking
one at random. After this, it will always attack the gladiator who caused it the greatest
amount of damage in the previous round.

Battles

Often put on as part of the mid-afternoon entertainment by arena managers in the
build up to a grand finale, full-scale battles are popular with the crowd for their intensity
and sheer amount of blood-letting. Often dressed in the armour and equipment of
historical or mythical enemies, two teams of gladiators fight a full battle to the death.
Each team will generally number between five and twenty gladiators though games
commemorating special events may feature fifty or more on a team, given a large
enough arena. Champion gladiators are rarely used for such butchery as it is seen as a
waste of their talents though again, a new gladiator may easily make his name in such
a confrontation.
Weapons & Armour: Random for each side – every gladiator on a team carries
identical weaponry and armour. Melee only.
Alex Greene (order #4281056)

49

8

50

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

Special Rules: Only the weaker gladiators are allowed in these huge bloodbaths, they
are for mass carnage and fuel for the crowd more than the glory of those who are about
to die. With such large amounts of combatants it is best to pick the two strongest
gladiators from each team, total their Strength and Dexterity together then add the
surviving team-members onto that. Then roll 2d10 and add this to each team’s score.
The team with the highest score wins the battle and each gladiator must make a
Routine Resilience test on the winning side, those who succeed live to fight another
day, those who do not… die.
The losing side are automatically killed and Mercy may never be appealed for in Battle
matches.
You can instead speed things up by using the Large Groups and Percentile Success
method found on page 44 of Legend.
Sands of Death: Stable masters detest using even their low ranking gladiators in battles
as the rewards are relatively poor and there is a good chance that every one they send
into the arena will be killed. To refuse, however, is to risk losing their arena contract
altogether so there is little to do but send gladiators in. The arena manager provides all
weapons and armour for battles but each stable master must donate one of his lower
ranked gladiators. If more gladiators are required to even up the numbers on a team,
use those presented in the Sample Gladiators chapter. Surviving gladiators gain no
extra Fame. They can be granted an Improvement Roll, however.

Sieges

A variation on the battle theme, arena managers arrange the construction of a wooden
stockade or tower in the centre of the arena. A superior attacking force is given ladders
and log rams and tasked to overcome the defenders inside.
Weapons & Armour: Attackers have a free choice of melee weapons and armour.
Defenders have a free choice of missile weapons, a single medium or smaller melee
weapon, and light armour.
Special Rules: Only gladiators of low rank are allowed to compete in a siege. The
attacking force has twice as many gladiators as the defenders and will have as many
ladders and log rams as they can carry. The defenders start inside a two or three storey
wooden structure. If the quick combat resolution method detailed in battles is used,
assume the defenders have twice as many gladiators as they actually do. Mercy may
never be appealed for in sieges.
Sands of Death: As in the case of battles, stable masters detest using even their low
ranking gladiators in sieges as the rewards are relatively poor and there is a good chance
that every one they send into the arena will be killed. To refuse, however, is to risk
losing their arena contract altogether so there is little to do but send gladiators in. The
arena manager provides all weapons and armour for sieges but each stable master must
donate one of his lower ranked gladiators. If more gladiators are required to even up the
Alex Greene (order #4281056)

51

8

numbers on a team, use those presented in the Sample Gladiators chapter. Surviving
gladiators gain no extra Fame. They can be granted an Improvement Roll, however.

Naval Battles

Very few arenas are truly capable of staging naval battles, as many have an underground
tunnel complex that would be flooded if the arena was filled with water. Added to
that, the logistical problems of moving the sheer amount of water required, even with
magical aid, are immense. If willing spellcasters are present and available to the arena
manager, it still takes vast numbers of them to fill even a small arena with enough water
to float a sizeable vessel. Naval battles are thus extremely rare but always guaranteed to
draw the crowds, particularly if the arena is in a city far from the sea. Such events are
run in much the same way as battles, with each team of gladiators on board a small
ship. Many variations abound, with no two naval battles ever being quite the same.
More than two ships may be used, they may be armed with rams and siege weapons or
they may be set alight before battle begins. An artificial island may be constructed in
the centre of the arena complete with a wooden tower to combine naval battles with
sieges. Vicious and powerful sea monsters may also be placed in the arena to further
excite the interest of the crowd though this tends to be hideously expensive. In other
cases, only a single ship may be used, with the gladiators fighting off a team of captured
or magically controlled sea creatures.
Weapons & Armour: Random for each side – every gladiator on a team carries
identical weaponry and armour.
Special Rules: Only gladiators of low rank are allowed to compete in a naval battle.
Mercy may never be appealed for in naval battles. If you wish, you can use the rules for
naval combat in Arms of Legend.
Sands of Death: Stable masters detest using even their low ranking gladiators in naval
battles as the rewards are relatively poor and there is a good chance that every one
they send into the arena will be killed. To refuse, however, is to risk losing their arena
contract altogether so there is little to do but send gladiators in. The arena manager
provides all weapons, armour and ships for naval battles but each stable master must
donate one of his lower ranked gladiators. If more gladiators are required to even up the
numbers on a team, use those presented in the Sample Gladiators chapter. Surviving
gladiators gain no extra Fame. They can be granted an Improvement Roll, however.

Sacrificial Games

While the crowd values combats that pit gladiators of roughly equal strength against
one another, so as to never be quite sure of the final outcome, arena managers are all too
aware the primary attraction is blood-letting, the infliction of pain and suffering upon
others. It is also understood that a cruel and sadistic streak in the crowd appreciates
macabre humour. Thus were born the sacrificial games, matches where unskilled and
unarmed captives are thrown into the arena to be met by vicious and hungry beasts,
normally dire wolves or large wild cats. This provides a beneficial (to the arena) way

52

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

of disposing of petty criminals or prisoners from an enemy nation. In some cities it
also has religious connotations in that these helpless souls are sacrificed directly to a
patron deity or, alternatively, are followers of some rival god with whom a war of faith
is currently being fought.
There are no real rules with which to play out a sacrificial game – low level, unarmed
captives will stand little real chance against these wild animals and thus you may assume
none will survive. If player characters are ever thrown down into the arena, they will
likely face perhaps a half dozen of these creatures while the crowd bays for their blood.

Armed on Unarmed

Such matches may sometimes arise as the result of handicaps in other fights between
gladiators of uneven skill but occasionally they are scheduled as a fixed part of the
games. One or more gladiators, generally very well armed and armoured will battle
a more experienced one given only light armour at best and no weapon. A very
small number of gladiators specialise in this form of unarmed combat and are always
guaranteed to pull in the crowds.
Set up: As for One on One or One on Many, depending on whether one gladiator is
to face the unarmed combatant or several. Gladiators will start within ten feet of one
another.
Weapons & Armour: Armed gladiators have random melee weapons and armour. The
unarmed gladiator has light armour and no weapons.
Sands of Death: A gladiator is chosen from one random stable. This is the unarmed
gladiator. The other stables must put forward gladiators to face him.

Blind Fight

Like Armed on Unarmed, this type of match may arise from a handicap but again, there
are a few gladiators who specialise in this form of combat. An experienced gladiator is
given heavy armour and a blindfold and then set against a gladiator of far lower ability
with no armour. A common variation is to simply blindfold every gladiator, for the
crowd delights in the sight of the combatants flailing wildly about with their weapons,
hoping to make contact with an opponent before an unseen sword swing ends their
own life.
Set up: Any match may be adjusted into a Blind Fight by giving each gladiator a
blindfold, though battles would be fairly bizarre. The basic Blind Fight, however,
pits one gladiator against a blindfolded one of up to twice his own character level.
Gladiators will start within ten feet of one another and are assumed to have been led
into the arena whilst blindfolded, so they must first find their opponent.
Weapons & Armour: Random melee weapons. The blind fighter has heavy armour,
while opponent has none.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

53

8

Special Rules: The blindfolded gladiator is at -40% on all combat and dexterous
related actions in a fight. They can make a Difficult Perception test to reduce this
penalty to -20% at the start of each round.
Sands of Death: Blind Fights generated for Sands of Death will always involve every
gladiator being blindfolded.

Mounted Matches

Speed of horse is always an exciting thing to witness, even within the confines of an arena.
The very best of gladiators are capable of using steeds as an additional weapon, barging
past the enemy, leaving them sprawling, before trampling over the broken body with
iron-shod hooves. Mounted matches may take many different forms and any of the other
matches listed here may be enhanced simply by giving each gladiator a mount – horses
are the most readily available, though other creatures are often used too.
Set up: Any match may be adjusted into a Mounted Match simply by giving each
gladiator a horse or similar creature. The basic Mounted Match, however, pits a team
of those on foot against one mounted. Each team of gladiators will start on opposite
sides of the arena, as far apart as possible. Mercy may never be appealed for in mounted
matches.
Use the rules for Mounted Combat on page 137 of the Legend Core Rulebook.
Weapons & Armour: Random.
Sands of Death: Much to the chagrin of stable masters, each stable must provide its
own mounts for its gladiators. Those stables unable to provide mounts may only take
part in matches that pit mounted gladiators against those on foot.

Chariots

There are few matches that can get the crowd jumping out of their seats as the chariot
race can. Those gladiators who become skilled in controlling a very light vehicle drawn
by incredibly fast horses are amongst the most respected in the entire arena and if a
man can make his mark whilst in a chariot, his career is set. Chariot races are incredibly
exciting to watch, for the sheer speed of the combatants is something rarely witnessed
outside of the arena and the slightest mistake often results in a grisly and blood-soaked
death. The successful chariot drivers are the true heroes of the arena, of that there can
be no doubt. Chariots are also occasionally used against gladiators on foot, though
there are few who would willing wager on even a renowned fighter being able to take
on charging horses and spinning scythes.
Set up: Chariot races start with all competing chariots side by side – if there is no
room, those with the highest Fame will be positioned ahead of those with lower scores.
The track is normally an oval running around the outside of the arena with enough
room for two chariots to travel side by side all the way around. However, other designs
are also common, particularly the lethal ‘figure-8’. Chariot games against gladiators

54

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

pit a team of those on foot against one or more in chariots. Each team of gladiators
will start on opposite sides of the arena, as far apart as possible. Mercy may never be
appealed for in a match involving chariots. Full rules for chariots are given on page 61,
and you can also use the rules for vehicles found in Arms of Legend.
Weapons & Armour: Random.
Sands of Death: Stables must provide their own chariots and horses – this can be an
expensive business! Those stables unable to provide mounts may only take part in
matches that pit chariots against gladiators on foot. Remember that every gladiator
receives a point of Fame for just competing in a chariot race, win or lose.

Jousts

A popular pursuit of chivalric nobility, jousts also make for interesting diversions within
the arena. If noble knights are putting on the show, they will do so with great pomp,
resplendent in their finest armour and under family banners of immense honour. This
is often the only way nobles can enter the arena as combatants in many cities without
facing public disgrace. If gladiators are used for jousts, however, they will do so with no
armour, carrying only a shield and a lance. Such jousts are fast and bloody, just as the
crowd likes them, with terrific injuries being scored on each pass.
Set up: Gladiators will be paired off for this match and joust until one of the pair is
killed or yields. The winner of this pair will then joust with a winner from another pair
and so on until only one victor remains. These jousts are performed one at a time, not
Alex Greene (order #4281056)

55

8

simultaneously, the better for the crowd to see the action. Mercy may never be appealed
for in jousts.
Weapons & Armour: No armour except shield, and lances.
Use the rules for Mounted Combat on page 137 of the Legend Core Rulebook. Assume
each combatant receives a single simultaneous attack on each pass. Mounts may not
attack in a joust, no matter what their type.
Sands of Death: Only stables with mounts are permitted to enter the joust. Each
stable is permitted to enter more than one gladiator into a joust (and no, they may not
share a horse) though be warned; they may well end up fighting each other.

Lord of the Pyramid

Occasionally used as a grand finale to a day’s games, Lord of the Pyramid matches
require the arena manager to arrange the construction of a large pyramid structure
in the centre of the arena, with at least a dozen tiers or levels. Gladiators start on the
lowest tier at equal distances from one another. The gladiator who reaches the top
of the pyramid and defends it successfully against all the others wins. This normally
requires the outright slaughter of all opponents though any gladiator may yield simply
by climbing down off the pyramid. Arena managers sometimes create further problems
for the gladiators by chaining some species of deadly monster to the highest level.
Set up: A pyramid of at least twelve levels is placed in the centre of the arena and
gladiators start at roughly equal intervals along the edge of the lowest level.
Weapons & Armour: Random. Melee only.
Special Rules: The steps of the pyramid tend to be quite steep to further impede the
gladiators. A Routine Athletics test must be made to go up each level. A gladiator may
leave the match simply by climbing down off the pyramid or by being thrown off.

The Blood Bath

The Blood Bath is an evocative title for a match that guarantees extreme violence and
is often used as the final fight of a day’s games. Few stable masters willingly participate
in one unless they believe they hold a great advantage over their competitors as the
very best of gladiators can easily become maimed or even killed in the Blood Bath.
This match is basically a no-holds barred, anything goes event, with no restrictions
on gladiator skill, weaponry, armour or even numbers. Stables often use such a deadly
match to compete directly against one another over some point of business honour or
even to force one another out of the arena altogether.
Set up: All gladiators start no closer than ten feet from each other. Any number of
stables may compete, with each submitting any number of gladiators. There is a
complete free choice of weapons, armour and other equipment and any skill level of

56

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

gladiator can enter from the lowest to the highest. Quite literally, anything goes! Mercy
may never be appealed for in a blood bath.
Weapons & Armour: Gladiator’s free choice.

Devising Your Own Matches
These are just examples of the most common types of matches that many arenas will
stage for the benefit of their crowds. Both players of the Sands of Death game and
Games Masters are encouraged to devise their own more spectacular games – your
imagination really is the only limit to what gladiators may be subjected to when they
step into the arena.
Fights on weakened rope bridges above magically created rivers of lava certainly make
for a stunning spectacle, as would chariots that have literally been set on fire. Whilst
magic itself is usually banned for combatants, it can be readily adapted by ambitious
arena managers to stage events and matches that will be truly memorable for the mob.
Listed below are just a few other ideas to kick start your own creations;
•	 Two mages armed with coercion-type spells, attempting to force half a dozen
gladiators to slay the other spellcaster.
•	 The archetypal mage duel, with two wizards battling it out with their most potent
spells. This may also be an opportunity to settle once and for all who is the greater
spellcaster.
•	 Chain gangs fighting over an arena riddled with hidden acid jets primed to erupt
whenever they come too close.
•	 Catapult duels, with gladiators needing to assemble their weapon before aiming
it at another team on the other side of the arena. Doing this with ballistae could
be fun too…
•	 Bear fights, where experienced gladiators face either a normal bear or a massive
bear like creature with no weapons and armour. The crowd will expect the blood
to flow freely in such a match.
•	 Platforms raised above an acid bath or lava pit, slowly sinking as gladiators fight on
top. Only when one gladiator stands does the platform stop.
•	 A maze, constructed out of wood, or magically crafted out of stone, where
gladiators run through, desperately trying to find their opponents before they are
surprised themselves. The open-topped nature of the maze allows the crowd to
view the action fully and even shout warnings to their favoured gladiators.
•	 Massacres where dozens of slaves are set against a handful of very experienced
gladiators. Normally a scene for immense carnage (always a favourite with the
mob), it has been known for the frightened slaves to unite and overcome the
gladiators by sheer weight of numbers.
•	 An archery duel, where two gladiators face each other right across the length of the
arena, attempting to fire as many accurate arrows as they can before their opponent
finds his mark.
•	 Mock battles that recreate historical events or special occasions.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

57

8

fame, mercy & the crowd
Should a gladiator survive his brushes with death in the arena, he will naturally attain
much respect from the crowd and start the process of becoming a great celebrity within
the arena. This is an inevitability and the best gladiators quickly learn to use this to
their advantage. Gladiators are also dependant on the crowd when matches do not go
as planned – very few gladiators are truly undefeated in the arena and whilst losing a
fight often means death, some well-liked gladiators may find themselves in a position
to appeal to both the crowd and the noble presiding over the games for mercy.

Fame
A well known gladiator who has attained his fame purely through his sword arm is
eagerly awaited by the crowd. For hours they may patiently sit through numerous
matches, waiting for the time when their favourite gladiator steps on to the sands of
death. As he walks through the entrance to the arena, a deafening cry will erupt from
the mob, increasing further in volume as he raises his weapon in salute. Many veteran
gladiators live for this cry of recognition and, in time, they begin to seek it far more
than mere gold. With the support of the crowd, the gladiator gains something far more
important than riches – reputation. With each parry of his shield and every thrust of
his weapon, the crowd cheers him own, willing him to overcome his opponent. This
can have a very real effect on the outcome of matches for a gladiator supported by the
shouts and cries of thousands of spectators may well begin to feel invulnerable whilst
his opponent may justly be intimidated by the constant boos and hisses that greet his
appearance.
All gladiators have a Fame score. A gladiator with a high Fame score is renowned, able
to excite the crowd with his mere presence and is an absolute terror to face in the arena.
One with a low Fame is just starting out on his career, or else is a mediocre gladiator
at best, given to failing in matches and easily yielding to opponents. The latter rarely
lasts long in any arena.
A new gladiator just walking into the arena for the first time starts with a Fame score
equal to 10% of that of his stable’s, rounded down. This is a one-time bonus and
reflects the fact that a well known stable is always looked upon as producing worthy
gladiators. Monsters who do not act as gladiators never receive Fame.
From this point on, gladiators may only gain (or lose) fame through their actions
within the arena, as shown on the table below. These bonuses are only ever added after
a match has been fought, never during.

58

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

Action
Every hit that scores 8 or more points of damage
Defeating an opponent
On victorious side in a match
Competing in a chariot race
Winning a chariot race
Yielding to an opponent
Slaying an opponent appealing for mercy

Fame Bonus
+1
+5
+1
+1
+1 per opponent beaten
-3/per opponent in match
-20

When gladiators meet in combat, compare their Fame scores. The gladiator with the
highest Fame score is likely to enjoy quite a substantial advantage over his opponent,
gaining a temporary bonus to his attack rolls. This bonus will increase with greater
amount of Fame, as shown below. However, it must be recalculated every time a
gladiator begins to fight a new opponent.
Difference in Fame
1-4
5-8
9-15
16-25
26-49
50+

Attack Bonus
+0
+5%
+10%
+15%
+20%
+25%

Bonuses gained from the presence of a crowd only ever apply when a character is within
the arena. They do not apply in regular adventuring.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

59

8

Mercy
Any gladiator may appeal for mercy to the crowd and possibly the noble presiding over
the arena. To do so can represent a tremendous loss of face, as reflected in the Fame
rules above, but if survival is granted, the gladiator will be alive and free to compete in
the arena another day.
Any gladiator who is conscious and severely wounded may drop his weapon, fall to
his knees before his opponent and raise his arm in appeal as an action. While it has
been known for bitter rivals to take advantage of such a position, such brutal action is
frowned upon by the crowd, nobles, arena managers and stable masters alike and can
seriously damage the reputation of a gladiator. Most back slightly away, looking to the
crowd and the noble watching over the games to await their decision of whether his
opponent is worthy of mercy. It is important to note here that a gladiator may not, of
course, ask for mercy from an unintelligent monster.
When mercy is asked for, the crowd will erupt into howls of both support and derision,
growing louder and louder until one side becomes dominant. Whilst the final decision
is ostensibly the noble’s he will usually look to the crowd to gauge popular opinion –
thus, a gladiator’s influence over the crowd can literally make the difference between life
and death. A crowd will generally be lenient towards a gladiator who fought well but
was completely outclassed by a more skilled opponent and will also tend to favour the
most renowned combatants – nobody wants to see their hero instantly slain. Regardless
of the verdict, a gladiator risks his whole career’s reputation on begging for mercy but
it is sometimes the only way to survive a dangerous match.
A gladiator begging for the crowd’s lenience must succeed in a Difficult Persistence test
(also called a Mercy test). This test is modified as follows.
Action
Scored at least one hit on opponent
Brought opponent to zero or less in a hit location
Fame
Failed to score a single hit on opponent

Modifier
+5%
+25%
+Fame score
-25%

If the Mercy test is successful, the gladiator is removed from the arena immediately and
is deemed to have lost the match. If it is failed, his opponent may attack immediately,
automatically maximum damage in the first round of combat as he takes advantage
of the gladiator’s position. He also gains a +25% bonus to his attack rolls against the
yielding gladiator for the rest of the combat.

60

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

chariots
Whether in racing or direct combat, chariots are always guaranteed to entertain
the mob. The sheer speed of such matches is breathtaking to behold and the power
mustered by a chariot pulled by racing horses ensures plenty of the bloodshed the
crowd desires to see in the arena. Charioteering is an even more dangerous pursuit for
the gladiator as it introduces a wide range of lethal variables into any event – horses
must be controlled, fast speeds allow precious little reaction time and an overturning
chariot has ended the life of many combatants. But for any serious about advancing
their career on the sands of death, chariot races provide a sure-fire method of gaining
the attention of the crowd which is, ultimately, what every gladiator strives for.
Rules for setting up chariot races and matches are given on page 54 but provided here
are all the necessary tools you will need to conduct this unique form of combat within
the arena.
Chariots
All chariots require either light or heavy warhorses to pull such a weight at speed but
there is a wide variation within the chariots themselves. Listed below are the three
most common designs seen within arenas across the world. All vary from each other in
several ways and are given the following characteristics;
Common Speed: This is the modifier that governs the total speed of Movement for
being(s) drawing the vehicle, be they horses or more exotic creatures. To a minimum
of one metre per round.
Drive Modifier: This is the modification applied to the Drive skill of anyone who
drives the vehicle.
Maximum Drawing Mounts: This is the number of mounts that can be harnessed to
pull the vehicle along.
AP/HP: The Armour Points and Hit Points of the vehicle as a whole. Once the vehicle
is reduced to zero Hit Points it is destroyed.
Ram Damage: The amount of damage the vehicle inflicts when it performs a ram, see
Arms of Legend, page 97.
ENC Limitations: This is the total amount of ENC the vehicle may carry before the
vehicle’s Movement is reduced. For every 10 ENC the vehicle is over its limit, it loses
one metre of movement speed.
Alex Greene (order #4281056)

61

8

Battle Chariot
This is a two-wheeled variant of the normal chariot, designed for spectacular battles. It
is drawn by two or more steeds and has raised/spiked walls which allow passengers to
attack. It has bladed wheel spokes and an armoured main body, it is capable of causing
horrific damage to enemies if used correctly. The walls provide cover for the legs and
abdomen of the driver. Unless attacked from the rear, where cover is negated, see page
136 of the Legend Core Rulebook.
Common Speed: -2m
Drive Modifier: -5%
Maximum Drawing Mounts: 4
AP/HP: 4/30
Ram Damage: 1D10+drawn DM
ENC Limitations: 100
Cost: 750 SP
Heavy Chariot
This chariot is designed to be drawn by a team of four or more heavy animals; it is quite
a weight and designed to carry a small complement of people across flat terrain fast. It’s
not so good on tight turns. The walls of the chariot are quite well protected and they
provide good cover at the front and sides for the driver‘s arms, legs and abdomen. See
page 136 of the Legend Core Rulebook. This cover is negated if the driver is attacked
from the rear.
Common Speed: -4m
Drive Modifier: -Maximum Drawing Mounts: 4
AP/HP: 3/30
Ram Damage: 1D8+drawn DM
ENC Limitations: 125
Cost: 600 SP
Light Chariot
Originally designed for sport racing rather than combat, this nippy little chariot is
excellent at turning and keeping pace with other faster chariots. It can carry only a
driver and does not make for very spectacular battles, though it can often be used in
variant games of Cat and Mouse, where several cats (larger chariots) are chasing one
small light chariot (the mouse). The light chariot covers the legs of the driver only and
protects the front and sides, any attack from the rear negates the Cover rules as found
on page 136 of the Legend Core Rulebook.
Common Speed: -1m
Drive Modifier: +5%
Maximum Drawing Mounts: 2
AP/HP: 3/25
Ram Damage: 1D6+drawn DM
ENC Limitations: 50
Cost: 500 SP

62

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

War Chariot
This is what happens when you take a Battle Chariot and you add an additional rear
wall, jutting blades, wheel spokes with massive spikes and armoured wheels. There are
also downward facing blades which surround the wall edges of this chariot, it is a beast.
The walls of the chariot cover the legs, abdomen and protect the legs and abdomen of
the passengers; they provide Cover as per page 136 of the Legend Core Rulebook. This
cover is negated if the vehicle is attacked from the rear, since the protection only counts
for the front and sides.
Common Speed: -2m
Drive Modifier: -10%
Maximum Drawing Mounts: 8
AP/HP: 5/30
Ram Damage: 2D8+drawn DM
ENC Limitations: 100
Cost: 900 SP
You may also wish to incorporate the Transport rules found on page 90 of Arms of
Legend which covers vehicle control, ramming and combat in detail compared to this
simple system.

Movement
Chariots move in initiative order in the same way as any mounted gladiator. There are,
however, some important differences. A chariot may turn once at any point in its move,
up to the amount listed as its turn rate. Any chariot may make this turn whilst making
a normal or double move but none can normally turn whilst running.
In addition, chariots may ‘drift’ up to ten feet left or right for every full thirty feet they
move forwards. This is performed as a free action and in no way impedes any other
movements the chariot may perform.
A chariot driver may choose to whip his horses harder but forgoes any other actions. If
he succeeds at a Routine Drive test, he may increase his base speed by ten feet for that
round only.

Tight Turns

The driver may also attempt to get his chariot to turn in a much tighter fashion than
may be advisable. A driver may choose to make two turns in a round instead of just
one, though these must be made at the beginning and end of the move – they may not
be made halfway through as a normal turn may. This takes all the driver’s actions and
concentration and requires the driver to make a Routine Drive test if he is moving at
base speed and a Difficult Drive test at double speed. A single turn may be made at
maximum speed, again with a successful Hard Drive test.
If these checks are failed, the chariot will automatically overturn at the start of the next
turn, as covered below in Collisions and Overturning.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

63

8

Combat
All passengers on board a chariot may make their normal attacks as if they were mounted.
The chariot driver, however, must always dedicate at least one hand to controlling the
horses and so may only fully utilise single-handed weaponry. Any passenger may make
an attack at any point in their move, such is the speed of the chariot. This in no way
affects the number of actions they may perform each round.
All chariots, no matter what their size, are assumed to take up a space five feet wide and
ten feet long, with the horses directly ahead. Either passengers, horses or the chariot
itself may be targeted by an attack if within reach or range, unless they are protected by
the cover of the chariot’s side walls as per page 136 of the Legend Core Rulebook.
If any horse is slain whilst pulling a chariot, it must be cut free within one round, as
described under Collisions and Overturning, or the chariot will automatically overturn.

Sideswipes
The crowd loves the spectacle of two chariots racing neck and neck, the crews striking
at each other as they attempt to manoeuvre their vehicles to damage the other or even
remove it from the race altogether.
Any charioteer moving his vehicle alongside another chariot may choose to sideswipe
it as an action. The drivers of both chariots must make an opposing Drive tests. The
winner will cause damage upon the loser’s chariot, as listed below.

Chariot Sideswipe
Damage: 2D6

Chariot with Scythes Sideswipe
Damage: 2D8, Bleed

Against Gladiators on Foot
The passengers of a chariot may attack any gladiator on foot as if they were mounted.
Those on foot may fight back as if the gladiators on the chariot were mounted.
However, the driver of a chariot may either overrun his enemies, or make scythe attacks
against them.
An overrun attack requires a Drive test, opposed by an Evade test. If the Drive skill test
succeeds then the opponent takes damage based on the sideswipe attack above.
Scythe attacks are made as a chariot moves adjacent to any suitable target and count as
a melee attack action. The driver must make a Drive test opposed by the target’s Evade
test. If the target succeeds, he manages to dodge the attack. If the chariot driver wins,

64

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

the scythes cut through the target, with devastating results. Use the scythe damage,
doubling it if the chariot is making a double move or faster.

Collisions and Overturning
One of the most impressive sights a spectator may ever witness is that of a chariot
moving at full speed then, for whatever reason, overturning. Wood, gladiators and
horses all tumble and break apart as the entire mess is veiled by a cloud of dust and
blood. Few ever survive such accidents and it is often only the skill of the charioteer
that can avoid such tragedy.
Drive tests are used by the driver to control his chariot whenever he attempts an
extreme action or when a collision looms up ahead. The difficulty of such tests are
shown in this table.
Action
Cutting free a dead horse before chariot overturns
Swapping drivers whilst chariot is in motion

Difficulty
Difficult -20%
Difficult -20%

Hitting medium-sized creature or object

Hard -40%

Hitting large sized creature or object
Hitting the arena wall

Difficult -20%
Very Hard -60%

There is a +10% bonus to this check if the chariot is moving at base speed or slower
and a -10% penalty if it is moving at running speed.
If the Drive test is successful, the chariot neatly avoids the obstacle or swerves at the last
moment. In the case of avoiding the arena wall, the chariot is placed alongside the wall,
its driver having brought his horses up short at the last possible moment.
Games Masters are encouraged to use the above examples as a base should their players
ever attempt an action not listed here. If the driver passes his test, he succeeds in the
action he was attempting or manages to avoid tragedy, as appropriate. If he fails the
test, the chariot must move in a completely straight line for the next round. No turns or
drifts may be attempted. If the chariot cannot move straight ahead for whatever reason
(the arena wall being directly in front of the chariot, for example), then the chariot will
automatically overturn. If he fumbles the test, the chariot will overturn

Overturning
If a chariot overturns, the chariot itself, along with all passengers and horses, take 2D6
damage to all locations; passengers can make a Difficult Evade test to avoid this.
An overturned chariot, if it survives intact, takes 1D6 minutes to put right and re-hitch
any living horses. This is far longer than most combats take within the arena and so is
rarely done during a match. The combined Strength required is equal to the original
hit points of the chariot.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

65

8

Chariot Upgrades
All chariots may be upgraded with fittings and devices designed to increase their
lethality in some way whilst within the arena. The weight of these upgrades is deducted
from the cargo capacity of the chariot in question. Many gladiators and stable masters
spend a great deal of time refitting their chariots and one of the draws of the races, as
far as the crowd is concerned, is to see exactly what modifications have been made and
then debate or gamble how they will effect the outcome of the match.

Metal Banding

Large metal plates or bands are strapped to the sides of the chariot, greatly increasing
its resilience to damage. Whereas a normal chariot may be susceptible to strikes from
axes and heavier weapons, it will take a determined and accurate hit to damage one
reinforced with metal banding.
Metal Banding adds +1 to a chariot’s AP. 300 lb. 250 SP

Rear Shield

Most chariots are completely open backed, allowing for fast mounting and dismounting
but providing no cover for attacks made to the rear. A rear wooden shield can be fitted
to the rear of any chariot, effectively making it an enclosed box on all four sides.
A rear shield provides the crew with Cover to their legs and abdomen from the rear,
as well as to the sides and front, but Evade tests to avoid damage from an overturn
become Hard. 50 lb. 150 SP.

Weapons Rack

Many chariots have the cheap addition of a simple wooden weapons rack mounted
inside, allowing crews ready access to a variety of weapons during a chariot race, much
to the enjoyment of the crowd.
A weapons rack holds up to ten large or smaller weapons. 25 lb. 50 SP.

Sands of Death

Stable masters will no doubt have great fun competing in chariot races in the Sands of
Death game. Whilst the risks of placing their gladiators upon a chariot are great, the
rewards almost make it worthwhile and they can certainly swing the odds further in
their favour through the judicious use of chariot upgrades.

66

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

exotic weaponry
Gladiators are the stars of the arena and the lowliest slave has the chance to gain
immense fame, even fortune. Just as important to the crowd as the individual gladiator
is, however, are the weapons he takes into the arena. A whole industry can spring up
around an arena, with weaponsmiths driven to conceive and construct more and more
unlikely looking weaponry with which the gladiators may batter, pierce and slash each
other with upon the sands of death.
Some gladiators gain recognition for using a particular type of unusual weapon, whilst
others concentrate on becoming proficient with many types of weapons in order to
keep their fans guessing. Whilst swords and axes may keep a crowd happy for a time,
the successful arena manager soon learns that a varied choice of weaponry can excite
interest as much as bringing in huge and expensive monsters. Whilst these weapons are
born out of the necessity of entertainment, most are quite lethal and some enterprising
adventurers take them out of the arena and into the wilds, especially if they are of a
gladiatorial background themselves.
All the weapons listed here are considered exotic weaponry and will require proficiency
for best use.
‘Welcome to Hazzar’s Emporium of Superlative Slayers. Venture inside and discover a true
wealth of implements and devices all designed specifically for your victory upon the sands
of death. . .’

Aclis

‘A very unsophisticated weapon to be sure, but if the rope is well-concealed, it can give a hell
of a surprise to an opponent who thinks he is out of range.’
The aclis is simply a heavy club attached to lightweight cord. Mainly used in melee
combat, it may also be thrown, with the cord being used to drag the aclis back to be
used again. Not an ideal weapon in normal combat, it may give an opponent a nasty
surprise and if used by several individuals at once, can stall even a determined charge.
The aclis has a maximum range of 20m, as this is the length of the cord it is attached
to. Dragging the club back after it has been thrown takes an action.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

67

8

Bolas, 3-ball

‘Far heavier than the wimpy two ball set, this weapon requires a little more skill to use but
can bring down a man with a single well placed throw.’
The 3-ball bolas is made from three heavy wooden or even metal spheres, connected
by a length of chain or strong cord and is a weapon designed to both damage and trip
an opponent at range.

Chakram

‘A most impressive weapon, guaranteed to impress the crowd as well as do an incredible
amount of damage against any opponent. In my opinion, the very first ranged weapon any
gladiator should learn to use.’
The chakram is a heavy metal disk with razor sharp edges, designed not only to produce
stable flight when spun towards an enemy, but also to return to the thrower if it should
miss through the use of a strong cord wound around its centre. A heavy metal gauntlet
(included in the purchase of a chakram) must be worn whilst wielding such a weapon,
for it is more than capable of slicing off fingers and even hands as it returns at high
speed to the thrower.
It is used in the same way as any other ranged weapon but will automatically return to
the thrower whether it hits or misses. If the thrower is not wearing a metal gauntlet, it
will cause normal damage on its return.

Light Harpoon

‘More often seen carried by beer-swilling pirates and other nautical misfits, the light harpoon
is a truly evil weapon. It is, then, perhaps obvious that it would be brought into the arena.’
This is a lightweight version of the weapon commonly seen on high seas ships, used to
defend the vessel against huge and terrible sea monsters, as well as capture larger fish
for food. When used against a living target, the harpoon’s barbed tip has a good chance
of lodging inside an opponent, causing a great amount of pain and suffering. This, of
course, makes them far easier to engage in regular combat.

Mancatcher

‘Vicious, underhanded and I love it! The mancatcher is more often seen in slaver trains
but it has an ideal use in the arena when gladiators fight in pairs. One traps an opponent,
holding him immobile, whilst the other moves in to finish him off.’
The mancatcher is a pole arm used to aid grapple attacks. By striking an opponent at
range, he may be held immobile and unable to strike back. The mancatcher also has
sharp spikes within its large metal and spring-loaded grips that can cause a considerable
amount of pain for anyone trapped within this weapon’s grasp.

68

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

Quad Crossbow

‘An essential weapon when you absolutely, positively have to slay every last son of a bitch in
the arena.’
A highly stylised ranged weapon that has the effect of always causing the spectator to
look twice in order to make sure of what they are seeing. Built around a heavy and
durable shaft, this weapon has four cross pieces, mounted in pairs and at right angles
to one another. Four bolts may be loaded simultaneously and they are fired as with a
normal crossbow, with the wielder simply turning the weapon ninety degrees after each
shot to make ready the next bolt. This allows the rapid firing of what is the equivalent
of a heavy crossbow, without the compromises of size and strength made with the far
more common repeating crossbow.
This crossbow can also use ammunition variants as found in Arms of Legend on page
80.

Spiked Helmet

‘Ah, yes, the spiked helmet. An essential man-mangling device for the fashion conscious
gladiator. Personally, I would prefer a good sword to this sort of foolishness, but you just
cannot help some people.’
This is a strong and very well armoured helmet, with a long sharp spike mounted
upon its top. Fashions and styles vary, but spikes have been seen measuring over a foot
in length. It is an impractical weapon, but the crowd loves the use of such esoteric
methods of killing and it can pack a surprising punch though is often best relegated to
the status of a backup weapon.

Wrist Razor

‘Cheap, relatively easy to use, and it doesn’t even interfere with a swordsman’s skill – the
perfect backup weapon.’
A wicked looking weapon, it comprises of a sturdy metal band secured to the gladiator’s
wrist and forearm, with two or three large blades extending out above and beyond
the hand. Such blades can be anything up to a foot or more in length and allow the
wielder to fight in the style of a wild cat, scratching and clawing at his enemy, gouging
great slashing wounds. They are usually worn as a pair and entire schools of fighting
have sprung up regarding their use. More practical gladiators, however, often wear
them in addition to using a more normal weapon, such as a sword. The wrist razors
do not impede the use of any other weapon, though shields are impossible to carry,
and provide a superior offence should the main weapon be lost through a disarming
or similar disaster.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

69

8

Spiked Helmet

Weapon
Aclis

Unarmed

Quad Crossbow -

Bolas, 3-ball
Chakram
Light Harpoon
Mancatcher

1H

1H
2H

IH/2H
1H

1D4+3

1D6

1D10

1D6
1D6
1D8
1D4

Damage
1D6

-

-

N

Yes
Yes
-

Damage
Modifier
-

T

T

150m

15m
30m
L
VL

Range/Reach
M

-

-

2

-

Load
-

10/9

6/10

6/9

-/9
-/13
7/7
9/10

STR/DEX
7/11

S

S

H

S
M
L

SIZ
M

Bleed

Impale,
Sunder
Bleed, Impale

Combat
Manoeuvres
Entangle, Stun
Location
Entangle
Impale
Entangle, Grip

1

2

2

1
1
2
3

ENC
2

6/8

5/12

4/8

3/3
4/7
2/7
4/10

AP/HP
4/4

20 SP
85 SP
35 SP
400
SP
400
SP
120
SP
125
SP

Cost
10 SP

70

Wrist Razor

8

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

dirty tricks of the sands
The arena is the scene of bloodshed, hope and utter desperation. Even the most
renowned gladiator may meet his match from new opponents he faces for the very
first time and there is always pressure from below as the less experienced seek to make
their own names in front of the crowd with his death. The consequences of failure in
the arena are total and final, with few matches allowing the loser to walk away with his
life. Even begging for mercy, a truly debased act for a famous gladiator, is no guarantee
of being spared.
It is thus perhaps inevitable that, throughout all the centuries arenas have existed,
gladiators have gradually devised many methods of either fooling the crowd or bringing
a quick, if not particularly noble end to their enemies. The dirty tricks, as they are
called, of the sands are rife throughout many of the larger arenas and even though a
city’s nobles may seek to bring about their end with promises of execution, still they
persist. For many gladiators, they represent the only hope of survival once they set foot
within the arena.
Any of the dirty tricks listed below may be attempted by players and their opponents,
provided they have the money and the courage to pull them off. Games Masters are
also welcome to come up with more, greatly elaborated schemes with which to test
their players and we have no doubt that the players themselves will prove the most
devious of all when it comes to such planning.
There is always a price to pay if a gladiator is discovered attempting foul play and
we have listed below suitable penalties to hard-earned Fame should this ever be the
case. This is representative of what will happen to the gladiator’s public opinion
in the vast majority of arenas and is the penalty used in the Sands of Death game
should stable masters ever feel the need to even the odds in their favour. However, in
regular role-playing sessions, the Games Master is welcome to be far more severe. In
arenas dominated by a totalitarian society that views games as a method to control
its population, this trickery may well result in immediate arrest and execution as an
example to others.

Bleeding Damage
The causing of grievous wounds that continue to bleed long after dealt is not strictly a
dirty trick and, indeed, the crowd often enjoys the mass of blood that results. However,
it is something many other gladiators take a very poor view of – if a man must die in
the arena, let it be quick. There is no need to prolong pain and suffering.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

71

8

Use the rules for Bleeding found in the Combat Manoeuvres section of the Legend Core
Rulebook.

Blood Bags
Gladiators will try many things to avoid death and the use of blood bags is especially
common where slaves are not used for the arena, but organised guilds are set up to
run the games. A leather sack or bladder is filled with the blood from an animal and
then concealed on some part of the gladiator’s body, hidden from the crowd and other
observers. Another gladiator will then strike the bag during the match, thus releasing
the blood as his opponent makes a great show of sinking to the ground and dying. This
does, of course, rely on the total co-operation of an opposing gladiator, but many are
known to make pacts with one another, promising to repay the favour one day.
A gladiator may purchase and hide a blood bag somewhere on his body for just 2 SP.
However, it will also require the total co-operation and knowledge of his gladiatorial
opponent in the match it is to be used and this may be particularly difficult to achieve,
especially if he is from a rival stable.
The blood bag may be burst on any successful hit the opponent wishes and the ‘dying’
gladiator must then make a Difficult Art (Perform) test to fool the crowd with his
death. In addition, his stable master will also have to make bribes to the slaves who
carry bodies off the sands and their owners to conceal the secret. This will take an
additional 1D6 x 100 SP.
If the gladiator fails to convince the crowd of his death, he is likely in very serious
trouble, as the use of blood bags is seen as the height of cowardice by the mob and it
certainly deprives them of true bloodshed. In more civilised societies, this will result in
the loss of 20 Fame points. In other, more wild places, it is highly unlikely the gladiator
or his accomplice will make it out of the arena alive.

Blowpipe
In an attempt to even the odds against a particularly well-respected opponent, less
honourable gladiators sometimes carry a small but well-crafted blowpipe into the
arena, little longer than the palm of their hand. Easily concealed, such a weapon is
loaded with a single poison dart that the gladiator will attempt to fire at his opponent
whilst in the midst of another action, so as to hide his intent. The true masters of this
trick are often able to fire the dart without even their opponent recognising what they
have done, let alone the crowd far away in the stands.
The shortened blowpipe will cost a mere 3 SP, but the poisons used upon the darts are
likely to be far more expensive - Games Masters may create their own or those listed
on page 78 of the Legend Core Rulebook may be readily used. Only a single dart may be
carried into the arena, as the blowpipe must be loaded and ready to fire as the gladiator
steps on to the sands – he will not be able to reload without giving away what he is doing.

72

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

Normally poisons are incredibly hard to locate and purchase, but players may assume
that stable masters in the Sands of Death game have a ready source of underworld
contacts able to procure such items.
The firing gladiator must also make a Difficult Sleight test to avoid the suspicion of the
crowd. A fumble will result in the loss of 10 Fame points.

Caltrops
In many arenas, these small metal spikes are not strictly considered illegal and the
crowd may even applaud their use, so long as the gladiator concerned is somewhat
overmatched by his opponent in the first place. The sight of a large gladiator hobbling
after his cunning halfling opponent has brought tears to the eyes of many crowds
before now.
Pulling Damage

A gladiator discovered pulling his damage will immediately face cat calls and derision
from the crowd, as well as lose 5 points of Fame. Use the rules on page 138 of the
Legend Core Rulebook.

Sands & Powder
Though very different in effect, the application of sand and dangerous powders within
the arena is much the same. All crowds enjoy the sight of a gladiator scooping up sand
and then hurling it in the face of his enemy before launching a devastating attack but
cunning gladiators have seized upon this tactic to employ distracting or even lethal
powders against an opponent.

Sand

Sand is freely available in most arenas – after all, a gladiator need only bend and scoop
up a handful. A successful attack will partially blind the target, who will then suffer a
-20% penalty to his next attack roll. Anyone attacking him during this time will receive
a +10% bonus to their attack rolls.

Irritation Powders

As per sand above, but this time the effect lasts for 1D6 rounds. Any gladiator
successfully employing irritation powders will lose 1D6 points of Fame.

Poison Powder

Using these powders is not without its own dangers for the wielder, as the merest breeze
can blow some back into his own face as he hurls it at an enemy. If a fumble is rolled
for the throwing attack, the thrower will be immediately affected by his own powder.
The Games Master may want to use powders derived from the poison rules on page 78
of the Legend Core Rulebook.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

73

8

The Fates entered the arena with a jingle of sparkling harness and glittering steel. They
circled the arena in their chariot allowing their adoring public a good look before the match
began. They were the only undefeated women to ever stride the sands of death. There were
still a few that believed ‘The Fates’ luck would run out. The Fates did not believe in luck.
They practised more than any other gladiators did, therein lay their good fortune.
Hamli allowed herself a small smile as the roar of the crowd overpowered the trumpets and
drums. She held the reigns of the gleaming chariot loosely in her left hand, her right hand
resting loosely on the hilt of her sword. Her black armour seemed to absorb light. Rose and
Gilda stood behind her to either side in shining white. The team of horses were similarly
decked, beautifully matched pairs of black and white steeds that the women had worked
with tirelessly.
At a pre-determined spot the elves vaulted over the front of the chariot onto the backs of their
horses, slipped the knots of the harness and circled to flank the chariot, their petite paleness
contrasting sharply with the powerful black flanks of the matched warhorses. The cheers of
the crowd surged to a deafening howl.
In her peripheral vision, Hamli saw one of their opponents begin to pray.

74

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

sands of death
There are many reasons a man may praise the existence of a grand arena. To the
commoner, it is relief from a life of drudgery, a chance to see bloodthirsty combat
portrayed as the ultimate in entertainment. A city ruler looks to the arena to suppress
the more violent tendencies of his population and curb their attention away from
problems of state that may otherwise make them ungovernable. For the slave, the sands
of death offer both the promise of violent release from the chains of servitude but also
the elusive lure of freedom.
Others look for profit. These are the stable masters, traders in the flesh of others for
monetary gain. They instinctively know a good gladiator on sight and scour the stocks
of slavers and prisons to find the most valuable commodity of any arena – men and
women who can fight, and fight well. Through shrewd business decisions that would
shame a wealthy merchant and the careful grooming of gladiators within their stable,
they may gain immense fortunes. Whilst a gladiator has the slim chance of becoming
rich himself if he survives enough fights, his stable master is likely to make ever
increasing amounts of gold no matter what the final outcome on the sands of death.

Playing the Sands of Death
Each player takes the part of a stable master, buying and cultivating gladiators to take
part in a range of fights for the entertainment of a blood-craving crowd. Competing
against the other stable masters, a player must ensure he has the best gladiators, the
finest quality equipment and the greatest luck in the arena if he is to succeed above the
others.
Alternatively, Sands of Death may be used as a core system in a regular campaign where
players have bought or otherwise come into ownership of a gladiator’s stable. Running
a few sessions in the arena will certainly make ‘downtime’ between normal adventures
more interesting! In this case, the Games Master is welcome to modify any of these
rules as he sees fit, and throw the players a real curve ball now and again, be it on the
sands with a surprise opponent, or nefarious dealings with rival stables.

Setting Up

Each stable master starts with 5,000 SP with which he must buy gladiators and equip
them with weapons and armour. Several sets of each will likely be required for every
gladiator as many of the fights they will engage in have strict rules as to what is and is
not permitted. There is no limit to the amount of gladiators you may purchase other
than the coin you have. The prices for them are listed below;

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

75

8

Race
Human
Elf
Dwarf
Halfling
Goblin
Orc

Cost (SP)
500
600
750
450
350
600

Players are advised to generate sample characters based on the Legend Core Rulebook and
buy their equipment from available stable master funds. Though in a pinch any previous
character could become a gladiator in the arena and fight for the pleasure of others.
Weapons can be bought from the Legend Core Rulebook for the cost listed there, and
from Arms of Legend as well as the unique gladiator weapons in this book. In very rare
cases Player gladiators could be allowed to start with their own equipment if they are
not slaves as detailed earlier on in the book.
Names should be chosen for each gladiator. We have noticed that gladiators with names
always seem to last longer within the arena than those without – you have been warned!

Monstrous Gladiators

A stable master may sometimes be drawn to providing monsters for the arena as the
contract rates can be very lucrative. Such creatures, however, are expensive and difficult
to both purchase and maintain, and few can effectively fight a truly experienced gladiator.
They do ultimately provide a great show for the crowd though. Some of the more
intelligent monsters may well compete as special event gladiators, presuming the reward
is suitable, or they may be under some magical compulsion to serve the stable master.
A sample cost table is provided below, this is by no means exhaustive and there are sure
to be greater creatures out there which are highly expensive.
Creature
Giant
Troll
Giant Centipede
Giant Spider
Tyrannosaurus
Velociraptor
Basilisk
Behemoth
Dragon
Ghoul
Gorgon
Skeleton

76

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

Cost (SP)
5,000
8,000
10,000
9,000
12,000
5,600
8,000
15,000
20,000+
2,000
12,000
1,000

8

Beginning Fame

A stable’s Fame score is very important for its master for this, above all else, determines
how well his gladiators are doing on the sands of death. A stable with a high Fame score
will immediately sway the crowd as a prized gladiator steps into the arena and will be
able to influence the arena manager to put forward more desirable matches.
A stable starts with a Fame score of 1D6. If any monstrous gladiators are included in
the stable at this point, a +2 bonus is awarded. If any goblins or orcs are included in the
stable, there is a +1 bonus to the Fame score. These bonuses are one-off awards and are
not given for each such gladiator in the stable.
A stable’s own Fame score is the total of all the Fame of its gladiators, plus its initial
Fame score. When a gladiator gains his freedom, is killed or otherwise leaves the stable,
he takes most of his Fame score with him. However, the stable retains 10% of his Fame
score as the memory of where this gladiator was trained and raised will live on. Over
time, stables can gain a very great reputation for producing gladiators who consistently
excel in the arena.

Turn Sequence
Each turn in Sands of Death represents a single day at the games. Stable masters are
contracted by the arena manager to provide a certain amount of gladiators for a specified
number of matches. Refusal is not an option and even when stable masters are presented
with a match likely to end the careers of one or more of their gladiators, they have little
choice but to comply. Failure to do so will result in the stable master having his contract
to provide gladiators revoked – he will be out of the business and out of the game!
Stable masters will be called upon to engage in four matches each turn, all of which are
randomly generated. At the end of these four matches, stable masters may challenge
one or more of their opponents to a match of their own choosing. Each turn follows
the sequence detailed below.

Step One

The stable master with the highest Fame score rolls on the Random Match Table on
the opposite page to determine which match will be played next. If any stables have
an identical amount of Fame, roll a die to decide who gains priority in this match.
All stables able to compete must do so – they may only refuse if they do not possess
the required equipment (horses or chariots, for example) or if they cannot provide a
gladiator of a suitable character level. This will no doubt involve a lot of pleading and
grovelling to the arena manager but, thankfully, this is not handled within these rules.

Step Two

The stable master with the highest Fame score then chooses which gladiator(s) he will
put forward in the match, following the rules in the Types of Matches chapter. He may
also choose what part his gladiator(s) will take in a match – being the lone gladiator
in a One on Many, for example. The other stable masters do the same, in descending
Alex Greene (order #4281056)

77

8

order of Fame. If there is still room for more gladiators after all stable masters have
decided who is going to enter the match, start the process of submitting gladiators
again, starting with the stable with the highest Fame score. Pre-match advertising also
takes place at this point.

Step Three

Stable masters are encouraged to introduce their gladiators before a match begins,
detailing the weapons and armour they are carrying. There are two ways to do this;
‘My half-orc warrior Tharg carries a battle axe and wears leather armour.’
Or…
‘Tharg the Mighty strides into the arena, whirling his huge axe above his head as he
challenges all comers to die at his hand. His battered leather armour is a testament to the
many matches he has fought and won.’
We’ll let you decide which is more fun.
The match is then fought, again using the rules for Types of Matches.

Step Four

The results of the match are calculated, slain gladiators buried and silver awarded,
as detailed below. Note that stable masters may not purchase new equipment and
gladiators, nor may gladiators gain Improvement Rolls until step seven.

Step Five

Steps 1-4 are repeated three more times so a total of four matches are played in this
fashion.

Step Six

Once these four matches are complete, the stable with the highest Fame score may
choose to challenge one or all of the other stables to a match of his choosing. Such
matches need not be those listed on the Random Match Table and, indeed, he is free to
conceive of his own match with his own rules. The other stable masters are, however,
under no obligation to accept the challenge. If the stable master with the highest Fame
score does not make such a challenge, then the stable master with the next highest
Fame may make a challenge in the same fashion. This continues until a match is fought
or it is determined that no stable master wishes to issue a challenge.

78

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

Random Match Table
D20
1-7

Match
One on One

8-10
11-12

Chain Gang
One on Many

13-14

Beast & Monsters

15-16

Chariot

17
18
19
20

Joust
Lord of the Pyramid
Mage Killer
Battle

Variation
1-14 Standard One on One
15-16 Matched Pairs
17-18 Blind Fight
19-20 Mounted
—
1-16 Standard One on Many
17 Chain Gang (the Many are chained in pairs)
18 Unarmed on Armed
19 Blind Fight
20 Mounted
1-18 Standard Beasts & Monsters
19 Chain Gang (gladiators are chained)
20 Mounted
1-16 Chariot Race
17-20 Chariot against Foot
—
—
—
1-10 Standard Battle
11-15 Siege
16-20 Naval Battle

Permitted Armour

Once a match has been decided, roll on the table below to determine the maximum
armour type permitted. This roll will apply to every gladiator competing unless the rules
of the match specify otherwise. Stables unable or unwilling to provide their gladiators
with the armour type rolled for must still compete, but with lighter or no armour.
D20
1-7
8-14
15-18
19-20

Armour
None
Max. 7 AP
Max. 21 AP
Free choice

Permitted Weaponry

Next, the permitted weaponry for gladiators must be rolled for. Unless match rules specify
weapon types, each gladiator must roll on this table separately, adding their Fame to the
die roll, thus creating a great variety of arms that will be taken into the arena. Stables
unable or unwilling to provide their gladiators with the weapon rolled for must still
compete with a smaller weapon. Shields may be used freely where possible and more than
one weapon may be taken by a gladiator, so long as both are permitted by the table below.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

79

8

D20
1-3
4-6
7-14
15-18
19-20

Weapon
None
Small
Small or Medium
Large
Free choice

Step Seven

Once the four contracted matches and any challenges have been resolved, surviving
gladiators are automatically healed and gain one Improvement Roll if they won. Stable
masters must pay their expenses and may purchase new equipment and gladiators. A
new turn then begins with step one.

Fighting Matches
All matches are resolved using the Legend combat system rules.
Miniatures may also be used, or not, as the stable masters collectively agree. Many of
the larger matches greatly benefit from the use of miniatures, however.
Hit points are not regained between matches unless a healer is present. All hit points
are, however, regained after each turn (day of games).

Winning Matches
At the end of every match, there will be a number of slain or, at very best, badly
wounded gladiators, along with the proud victors. Each stable gains a contract rate for
every gladiator they put into the arena, though victory in matches naturally leads to the
greatest rewards. With victory comes both fame and fortune, the latter being used to
purchase better equipment and even new gladiators to replace those lost.

Rewards

After each match, every stable that took part will earn the following amounts of gold
pieces;
Each gladiator who took part
Each gladiator who used exotic weaponry
Each defeated enemy
Each Combat Manoeuvre used

500 SP
100 SP
500 SP
50 SP

Gladiators themselves get a 10% portion of the amounts listed above. This goes into
their own purse which must be recorded. This purse is usually used by the gladiator
to buy his own freedom (see below). If the gladiator is slain, the purse is also lost,
perhaps to be used to support his family or, more likely, simply confiscated by the arena
manager. It is important to note this money is not the property of the stable master!

80

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

The remaining gold goes directly to the stable master to do with as he sees fit. Monstrous
gladiators normally do not receive the 10% take of the winnings – the stable receives
it all. There are exceptions, usually given to the more intelligent and powerful beings.
Improvement Rolls
The normal rules for Improvement from Legend apply here. Each gladiator gains an
Improvement roll every time he wins a match.

Mercy

It happens to every stable master sooner or later. A prized gladiator will walk into the
arena and through either bad luck or lack of skill, will be brought close to defeat. In
such circumstances, a stable master will bellow at his gladiator to kneel and appeal for
mercy to the crowd.
The rules for appealing for mercy are detailed on page 60, but if a gladiator appeals for
mercy, his opponent must wait to see the reaction of the crowd – he may not simply
wade in and finish him off.

Healing Gladiators

Ordinarily, gladiators do not heal hit points between matches and have to wait until the
next turn where they can rest and regain their health. However, a stable with a competent
healer has a tremendous advantage over its competitors. A good healer can patch a
gladiator up in a very short amount of time, even going as far as to provide mind-altering
herbs that can allow a combatant to forget just how badly hurt he really is.
A gladiator with the appropriate skill or spell may use their ability to heal as per the
Legend rules for healing.

Expenses

Every stable master in the arena can be heard to constantly grumble over how much
his gladiators are costing him each and every day. The fact that their income comes
primarily from the same gladiators seems lost to many of them. After each game turn,
every stable master must pay the amounts of SP listed below to sustain his gladiators
and beasts, and maintain their weaponry and armour.
Expense
Gladiator
Monster
Horse

Cost
10 SP +10 SP per point of Gladiator’s Fame
1,000 SP
20 SP

Gladiators with negative Fame (yes, it can happen!) cost 10 SP – you do not receive
money for having a poor gladiator!
If these expenses cannot, or will not, be paid, the stable will start to feel the effect of
its master’s penny pinching. Gladiators and monsters will suffer a cumulative –5%
Alex Greene (order #4281056)

81

8

penalty to attack rolls every time their expenses are not paid and horses will suffer 5
hit points of damage to all locations. The penalties applied to gladiators, monsters and
horses will be immediately removed once the stable master begins paying their expenses
once more.

Freedom
There are two ways a gladiator may gain his freedom from slavery by successfully
competing in the arena. It is up to the players to agree what success is, such as defeating
a powerful ranked gladiator or fighting in 100 matches, and so on. Such a successful
gladiator will be well renowned and the ‘grand gesture’ of giving him his freedom will
raise the people’s opinion of the ruler. The stable master has no choice in this. The
gladiator is removed from the stable, taking his purse with him.
However, the gladiator may be able to buy his freedom from the stable master. This
may happen at any time the stable master chooses – the gladiator is removed from the
stable, and the stable master in turn receives all the money in the gladiator’s purse.

Trading
Stable masters are often greatly jealous of the gladiators they groom and train, rejoicing
in every victory and jeering at their competitors after each successful match. Unknown
to those not within the inner circles of an arena though, is the fact that a lot of trading
does go on between rival stable masters. At the end of the day, they have more in
common with each other than any may care to admit, for they are all driven primarily
by profit. Many may take advantage of a good deal offered by another stable master and
be willing to buy or even trade gladiators and monsters between each other.
As far as the game Sands of Death is concerned, players are free to trade with one
another in any manner in which they see fit between matches. Gladiators, weapons,
monsters, in fact anything owned may be swapped or bought outright. Some stable
masters may even see fit to back up offers-that-cannot-be-refused with threats…
The stable master who spends the most money on advertising will gain the notice of
the crowd. For the next match only, all his gladiators will receive a +5% bonus to attack
rolls. If stable masters spend an identical amount of gold on pre-match advertising, no
one will receive this benefit.

Winning Sands of Death
There are no set victory conditions for Sands of Death. Instead, players are encouraged
to define their own before play begins – if they so wish. Indeed, Sands of Death may
continue for a great period of time, with players gaining satisfaction from grooming
their favourite gladiators. If you are having fun playing Sands of Death, don’t let the
completion of finite victory conditions stop you!

82

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

However, for players who prefer more strict guidelines, we recommend you choose one
of the following to be the victory condition stables aim for;
•	 Gaining a predetermined amount of SP
•	 Gaining a predetermined amount of Fame
•	 Alternatively, you may wish to have a time-based limit – perhaps the stable closest
to one of the above after a set amount of turns (games days)

Starting Gladiators
Players are advised again to create their gladiators for matches based on the Legend Core
Rulebook character generation rules, remembering that slaves do not start with free
equipment and most of their stable should be slaves. In special cases, equipment may
be taken from a character who willingly submits to the games.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

83

8

Pre-Match Advertising
The largest stables often employ artists to produce huge banners or a myriad of paper
sheets depicting their greatest gladiators and advertising when they will be fighting
in any one games day. This has the effect of whipping the crowd into a frenzy as they
ready themselves for what has been promised as the fight of the decade. Many may
be cynical about such pre-match ploys but it has an undeniable effect upon the mob
– a gladiator who has had the effect of such advertising will be greeted with howls of
triumph before he has struck a single blow in the arena. As with Fame, such support of
the crowd can have a beneficial effect on his fighting capability as his confidence grows
with each shout.
Before a match, stable master’s may advertise the event. However, other stable masters
may also choose to advertise their own gladiators and very soon, a war of banners and
leaflets will erupt before the match begins, with each stable attempting to outspend
the others to gain the notice of the crowd. Each player must secretly write down, in
multiples of 10, how many coins they are willing to spend on this pre-match advertising.
‘Are you mad?’ Gildena blinked at Hamli. ‘It is a sure way to become dinner for the crows.’
Rosanellwyia nodded her agreement with her sister.
Hamli smiled, her heavily accented elven frustrating the eavesdropping guard. ‘It is the only
way to get what we want. I have the documentation I need. Regupol’s arrogance and greed
will do the rest. The plan will work.’
The twins stared at each other, some unspoken communication flashing between them. The
human’s plans had kept them alive and as comfortable as a gladiatorial slave could expect to
be. If this final plan worked as Hamli seemed to think it would, the results would be more
than they had ever hoped for since their capture so long ago.
‘I think it would be enough to simply purchase our freedom. We may have enough saved to
do so even now. Though the laws are clear, I agree that Regupol will most likely find a way
to keep us, or make us pay double. There is no honour in the man.’
Rosanellwyia paused for a moment, before answering. ‘We will do it.’
Gildena sighed as her sister spoke.
‘We Fates will have the crowd on our side. We cannot fail.’ Hamli’s wolfish smile reminded
the elves of the first time they saw her… strangling Lord Regupol with his own pomander.

84

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

sample gladiators
The purpose of the gladiators presented here is two-fold. Firstly, they may be used
as opponents in the Sands of Death game with which to challenge players if they
have too few gladiators themselves for any given match. Games Masters might want
to create some more prior to beginning a Gladiatorial Campaign or embarking on
Sands of Death. None of them are champions or specialists; they are all new to the
arena and should provide a suitable challenge for beginner gladiator players to fight
against or with.
All the gladiators listed here may be armed and armoured as the Games Master wishes.
Just remember to change the Combat Style to match the new weapon.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

85

8

Alaric ‘Bloodsong’ (human)
STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
3D6
3D6
2D6+6
2D6+6
3D6
3D6
3D6

Average
12
7
14
16
14
13
10

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-9
10-12
13-15
16-18
19-20

Combat Actions 3

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
----/5
----/5
2/6
2/7
----/4
----/4
----/5

Armour: Leather Jerkin, -1 Strike Rank
penalty

Damage Modifier
+1D2
Magic Points 14
Movement 8m
Strike Rank +15 (+14
if armoured)

Traits: None
Skills: Athletics 50%, Brawn 31%,
Culture (Own) 62%, Dance 23%, Drive
27%, Evade 46%, Evaluate 26%, First
Aid 49%, Influence 20%, Insight 55%,
Lore (Regional) 62%, Perception 55%,
Persistence 43%, Resilience 39%, Ride
32%, Sing 24%, Sleight 23%, Stealth
34%, Swim 19%, Unarmed 25%
Advanced: Common Magic 34%,
Language (own) 76%, Lore (The
Thunderer) 52%, Lore (Tactics) 32%,
Survival 31%, Pact (The Thunderer) 14%

Weapons
Type 		
Shortsword	
Dagger		
Heater (Shield)	
Sling		

Range	
--	
--	
--	
200m	

Size	
M	
S	
L	
L	

Reach	
S	
S	
S	
--	

Damage			
1D6 Bleed, Impale	
1D4+1 Bleed, Impale	
1D4 			
1D8 Stun Location	

AP/HP
6/8	
6/8
6/12
1/2	

Combat Styles
Sword & Shield 80%, Dagger 45%, Sling 61%

Special Rules
Common Magic: Bladesharp 2, Thunder’s Voice 1, Heal 2, Vigour 1
Divine Magic (Magnitude 2): Crash of Thunder, Lightning Strike, Bless (Sword &
Shield)

86

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

Shanti ‘The Reaver’ Nightingale (elf)
STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
2D6+3
3D6
2D6+6
2D6+6
2D6+6
3D6+6
3D6

Average
10
11
13
17
13
17
11

Combat Actions 3
Damage Modifier +0
Magic Points 13
Movement 10m
Strike Rank +17 (+14
if armoured)

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-9
10-12
13-15
16-18
19-20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
2/5
2/5
2/6
2/7
2/4
2/4
3/5

Armour: Leather, -3 Strike Rank penalty
Traits: Life Sense, Night Sight
Skills: Acrobatics: 56%, Athletics 46%,
Evade 56%, First Aid 40%, Insight 45%,
Lore (Regional) 80%, Perception 50%,
Persistence 49%, Resilience 43%, Stealth
56%, Survival 55%, Track 30%
Advanced: Common Magic 54%: Clear
Path 2, Co-Ordination 2, Multi-Missile 2,
Pact (Grower) 60% - 3 Points of Dedicated
POW, Lore (Grower) 60%: Alter Target,
Behold, Evergreen

Weapons
Type 		
Longbow	
Longspear	

Range	
175m	
---	

Size	
H	
L	

Reach	
---	
VL	

Damage			
1D8 Impale		
1D10+1 Impale		

AP/HP
4/7	
4/10

Combat Styles
Longbow 80%, Spear 60%

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

87

8

Grime ‘Traitor’ Blacktooth (goblin)
STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
2D6+3
2D6+3
2D6
3D6
2D6+3
2D6+3
2D6

Average
10
10
7
11
10
10
7

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-9
10-12
13-15
16-18
19-20

Combat Actions 2

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
1/4
1/4
1/5
1/6
1/3
1/3
1/4

Armour: Tough Hide, No Armour
Penalty.

Damage Modifier -1D2
Magic Points 10
Movement 6m
Strike Rank +11

Traits: Night Sight
Skills: Athletics 75%, Brawn 45%,
Lore (Regional) 50%, Perception 70%,
Persistence 40%, Resilience 40%,
Sleight 70%, Stealth 75%, Survival
30%
Common Magic: 50%: Bandit’s Cloak
2, Bladesharp 2, Pierce 2

Weapons
Type 		
Shortspear	
Buckler		
Sling		

Range	
--	
--	
200m	

Size	
M	
M	
L	

Reach	
L	
S	
--	

Damage			
1D8+1 Impale		
1D3 			
1D8 Stun Location	

AP/HP
4/5
4/10
1/2

Combat Styles
Spear & Shield 45%, Sling 50%

88

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

Agaman ‘The Axe’ Stonebreaker (dwarf)
STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
4D6
2D6+12
1D6+6
2D6+6
3D6
2D6
3D6

Average
14
19
10
13
11
7
11

Combat Actions 2

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-9
10-12
13-15
16-18
19-20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
5/6
5/6
5/7
5/8
5/5
5/5
5/6

Armour: Chainmail, -7 Strike Rank
penalty

Damage Modifier +0
Magic Points 11
Movement 6m
Strike Rank +10 (+3 if
armoured)

Traits: Earth Sense, Dark Sight
Skills: Athletics 50%, Brawn 53%,
Craft (stone or metal working) 70%,
Engineering 35%, Evaluate 60%, Lore
(Mineral) 80%, Mechanisms 40%,
Persistence 43%, Resilience 67%
Magic: Sorcery (Dwarf Grimoire) 56%,
Manipulation 45%: Animate (Rock or
Metal), Damage Resistance, Form/Set
(Rock or Metal), Holdfast

Weapons
Type 		
Mace		
Target Shield	
Battleaxe – 2H	
Light Crossbow	

Range	
--	
--	
--	
100m	

Size	
M	
L	
M	
L	

Reach	
S	
S	
M	
--	

Damage			
1D8 Stun Location	
1D6 Impale		
1D8+1 Bleed, Sunder	
1D8 Impale		

AP/HP
6/6
4/12
4/8
4/5

Combat Styles
Mace & Shield 75%, Battleaxe (two handed) 65%, Crossbow 45%

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

89

8

Jane ‘Scaleblade’ McGarin (Halfling)
STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
2D6
2D6+9
1D6+3
2D6+6
3D6
2D6+9
3D6

Average
7
16
7
13
11
16
11

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-9
10-12
13-15
16-18
19-20

Combat Actions 3
Damage Modifier -1D4
Magic Points 11
Movement 6m
Strike Rank +15 (+12 if
armoured)

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
2/5
2/5
2/6
2/7
2/4
2/4
3/5

Armour: Leather, -3 Strike Rank Penalty.
Traits: None
Skills: Athletics 30%, Evade 35%, First
Aid 25%, Influence 25%, Perception
30%, Persistence 43%, Resilience 58%,
Sleight 50%, Stealth 40%
Common Magic 30%: Abacus, Becalm,
Detect Food, Entertainer’s Smile 2

Weapons
Type 		
Dagger		
Shortsword	
Sling		

Range	
--	
--	
200m	

Size	
S	
M	
L	

Reach	
S	
S	
--	

Damage			
1D4+1 Bleed, Impale	
1D6 Bleed, Impale	
1D8 Stun Location	

AP/HP
6/8
6/8	
1/2

Combat Styles
Shortsword 70%, Dagger 45%, Sling 60%

90

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

Thrakush ‘Stormbringer’ Guldar (orc)
STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Dice
4D6
3D6
2D6+3
3D6
2D6+3
4D6
2D6

Average
14
11
10
11
10
14
7

1D20
1-3
4-6
7-9
10-12
13-15
16-18
19-20

Combat Actions 3
Damage Modifier +0
Magic Points 10
Movement 8m
Strike Rank +13

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
-/5
-/5
-/6
-/7
-/4
-/4
-/5

Armour: None, No Armour Penalty.
Traits: Night Sight
Skills: Athletics 30%, Brawn 35%, Evade
40%, Perception 35%, Persistence 43%,
Resilience 55%, Stealth 35%, Unarmed
40%
Common Magic 20%: Bladesharp 2,
Pierce 2

Weapons
Type 		
Short Spear	
Scimitar		
Target Shield	
Short Bow	

Range	
--	
--	
--	
80m	

Size	
M	
M	
L	
L	

Reach	
L	
M	
S	
--	

Damage			
1D8+1 Impale		
Bleed			
1D6 Impale		
1D6 Impale		

AP/HP
4/5
6/10
4/12
4/4

Combat Styles
Spear & Shield 45%, Sword & Shield 45%, Bow 40%, Unarmed 40%

92

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

‘My Lords, Ladies and citizens of the Empire! For the final match of the season we have
a truly rare spectacle for your pleasure, a battle drawn directly from history! You are all
familiar with our beloved Lord Regupol, the hero of Valtana. See here re-created, in a reverse
pyramid match, he and his men’s daring escape from the clutches of the Barbarians of the
Outlands that preceded the Battle of Valtana which quelled the savages and made safe the
western border! Lord Regupol himself will lead the Fates in the role of the escapees!’
The arena manager gestured grandly to the top of the seven-level pyramid, which towered in
the centre of the arena. Hamli grabbed Regupol’s wrist and raised his arm high in a salute
to the crowd. Cheers and shouts washed against the sides of the pyramid, a sea of adoration
for the three women surrounding Regupol.
The lord spoke through a clenched smile.
‘Watch yourself, barbarian. Do not think that the mob will save you, should you harm the
hero of Valtana.’
‘Have you ever wondered why I do not have the auburn hair of the rest of my ‘barbarian’
kinsmen, Lord?’ Hamli’s voice grated through her teeth like a sword over a whetstone. ‘Have
you ever told anyone how you really escaped Valtana?’
Regupol’s face went white above his smile. ‘What are you on about, slave?’ Small beads of
nervous sweat began to dot Regupol’s brow.
‘How you accepted the hospitality of the barbarian king, swore allegiance, took a bride, used
her cruelly then slaughtered the guard as they slept unnaturally, drugged by your men.’ The
whip crack of Hamli’s laugh startled the Lord with its venom. ‘I thought not.’
‘You have taken one too many blows to the head, savage, to fabricate such a tale.’ Regupol’s
smile faltered as Hamli drew her sword.
‘As we fight, documents are being given to the Regent proving that I am your daughter, as
well as the gold for the freedom of we Fates. Included with the documents is a letter, written
by your hand, that states should your wife and child travel through the Empire they are to
be given all the considerations of a lady and a legitimate heir. Too bad you had not thought
to destroy that letter so many years ago.’ Hamli’s speech was cut off by the blare of trumpets,
announcing the beginning of the match. She let the fanfare end before she continued.
‘You see, I was not captured as a slave, I was sent as your assassin.’
Lord Regupol searched for a way out of the trap he had been led into. The arena showed
no mercy to those who stepped onto its sands. He had signed a contract to fight, he could
not escape. The gladiator’s plan was as well executed as any of his own schemes. He saw the
same hopeful look on the elves’ faces he had seen the day he bought them. He felt the ghostly
pressure of the pomander’s wand against his throat stealing his breath.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

93

8

‘See you on the ground, Father - if you survive.’
The Fates saluted Lord Regupol as if accepting an order. Each woman started down a
separate side of the pyramid, leaving Regupol to take the fourth side as his own.
‘They love whom they lower; they despise whom they approve.’
The Regent looked away from the crowd and peered down at the three women carrying
Lord Regupol’s body on his shield. The crowd had gone quiet when the noble received the
deathblow from one of the barbarians only halfway down the pyramid.
‘I wanted an afternoon’s distraction, but his fop has ruined that. No matter. You three, you
Fates are now free. You have earned it with your skill in the arena. What you choose to do
with that freedom is up to you.’ The Regent waved his hand in dismissal.
‘Have the human, Hamli I believe, sent to me on the morrow. Hopefully I can explain to
her that she is to be,’ he shook his head, ‘a lady.’
Kime handed the slaver a small pouch then walked over to the young, heavily chained slave
who was trying in vain to slip his hands out of his manacles. ‘Come boy, enough of that.
You’re coming with me to the arena stables. You’ve been chosen by the Fates.’

94

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

Legend & Open Content
Here at Mongoose Publishing, we want what we truly believe to be one of the best fantasy
RPGs on the market to be easy to use and modify. We have therefore made this rulebook
Open Content, in conjunction with the Open Game Licence.
All the text of this book is designated as Open Content – this means you are free to use
the Open Game Licence (overleaf ) to reproduce this text and build upon it with your own
scenarios and mechanics. You can even print and sell such work, if that is your desire (and we
would wish you the very best of luck if you choose to do this!).
By using the Open Content of this book, you also have permission to download the Legend
Compatible logo from our web site (on the Legend product pages), and use that on any Legend work you publish, to demonstrate your material is part of the wider Legend family.
Please note that the artwork in this book is not Open Content.
All books in the core Legend range (those whose titles have the word ‘Legend’ in them) will
also be designated as Open Content, allowing you to expand your own games in many different directions, while maintaining a solid root that everyone will be familiar with.
For example, you might be using Legend to produce your own gaming world. If you wanted
to add some high seas action, you can simply and quickly bring over the Open Content rules
we produce in, say, Pirates of Legend, knowing that everyone who plays Legend will at least
be familiar with those rules.

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

OPEN GAME LICENSE Version 1.0a
The following text is the property of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. and is Copyright 2000 Wizards of the Coast, Inc
(‘Wizards’). All Rights Reserved.
1. Definitions: (a)’Contributors’ means the copyright and/or trademark owners who have contributed Open Game
Content; (b)’Derivative Material’ means copyrighted material including derivative works and translations (including
into other computer languages), potation, modification, correction, addition, extension, upgrade, improvement, compilation, abridgment or other form in which an existing work may be recast, transformed or adapted; (c) ‘Distribute’
means to reproduce, license, rent, lease, sell, broadcast, publicly display, transmit or otherwise distribute; (d)’Open
Game Content’ means the game mechanic and includes the methods, procedures, processes and routines to the extent
such content does not embody the Product Identity and is an enhancement over the prior art and any additional
content clearly identified as Open Game Content by the Contributor, and means any work covered by this License,
including translations and derivative works under copyright law, but specifically excludes Product Identity. (e) ‘Product
Identity’ means product and product line names, logos and identifying marks including trade dress; artifacts; creatures
characters; stories, storylines, plots, thematic elements, dialogue, incidents, language, artwork, symbols, designs, depictions, likenesses, formats, poses, concepts, themes and graphic, photographic and other visual or audio representations;
names and descriptions of characters, spells, enchantments, personalities, teams, personas, likenesses and special abilities; places, locations, environments, creatures, equipment, magical or supernatural abilities or effects, logos, symbols,
or graphic designs; and any other trademark or registered trademark clearly identified as Product identity by the owner
of the Product Identity, and which specifically excludes the Open Game Content; (f ) ‘Trademark’ means the logos,
names, mark, sign, motto, designs that are used by a Contributor to identify itself or its products or the associated
products contributed to the Open Game License by the Contributor (g) ‘Use’, ‘Used’ or ‘Using’ means to use, Distribute, copy, edit, format, modify, translate and otherwise create Derivative Material of Open Game Content. (h) ‘You’ or
‘Your’ means the licensee in terms of this agreement.
2. The License: This License applies to any Open Game Content that contains a notice indicating that the Open Game
Content may only be Used under and in terms of this License. You must affix such a notice to any Open Game Content that you Use. No terms may be added to or subtracted from this License except as described by the License itself.
No other terms or conditions may be applied to any Open Game Content distributed using this License.
3. Offer and Acceptance: By Using the Open Game Content You indicate Your acceptance of the terms of this License.
4. Grant and Consideration: In consideration for agreeing to use this License, the Contributors grant You a perpetual,
worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive license with the exact terms of this License to Use, the Open Game Content.
5. Representation of Authority to Contribute: If You are contributing original material as Open Game Content, You
represent that Your Contributions are Your original creation and/or You have sufficient rights to grant the rights conveyed by this License.
6. Notice of License Copyright: You must update the COPYRIGHT NOTICE portion of this License to include the
exact text of the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any Open Game Content You are copying, modifying or distributing,
and You must add the title, the copyright date, and the copyright holder’s name to the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any
original Open Game Content you Distribute.
7. Use of Product Identity: You agree not to Use any Product Identity, including as an indication as to compatibility, except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of each element of that Product Identity.
You agree not to indicate compatibility or co-adaptability with any Trademark or Registered Trademark in conjunction
with a work containing Open Game Content except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with
the owner of such Trademark or Registered Trademark. The use of any Product Identity in Open Game Content does
not constitute a challenge to the ownership of that Product Identity. The owner of any Product Identity used in Open
Game Content shall retain all rights, title and interest in and to that Product Identity.
8. Identification: If you distribute Open Game Content You must clearly indicate which portions of the work that you
are distributing are Open Game Content.
9. Updating the License: Wizards or its designated Agents may publish updated versions of this License. You may use
any authorised version of this License to copy, modify and distribute any Open Game Content originally distributed
under any version of this License.
10. Copy of this License: You MUST include a copy of this License with every copy of the Open Game Content You
Distribute.
11. Use of Contributor Credits: You may not market or advertise the Open Game Content using the name of any
Contributor unless You have written permission from the Contributor to do so.
12. Inability to Comply: If it is impossible for You to comply with any of the terms of this License with respect to some
or all of the Open Game Content due to statute, judicial order, or governmental regulation then You may not Use any
Open Game Material so affected.
13. Termination: This License will terminate automatically if You fail to comply with all terms herein and fail to cure
such breach within 30 days of becoming aware of the breach. All sublicenses shall survive the termination of this
License.
14. Reformation: If any provision of this License is held to be unenforceable, such provision shall be reformed only to
the extent necessary to make it enforceable.
15. COPYRIGHT NOTICE
Open Game License v 1.0a Copyright 2000, Wizards of the Coast, Inc.
Legend Core Rulebook, Copyright 2011, Mongoose Publishing Ltd
Gladiators of Legend, Copyright 2012, Mongoose Publishing Ltd
Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

Alex Greene (order #4281056)

8

