                                                                                legend
                                                                                    arms of
                                                                                                                             arms of
                                                                                                                  legend

               ARMS OF LEGEND
An adventurer is only as good as his equipment, so the saying goes – and with
this mighty tome, your adventurer will be the best-equipped he can be. From
new weapons and armour, to the more mundane items that keep an adventure
going, Arms of Legend is a complete catalogue that will keep players coming
                    back for more after every adventure.




                                        MGP 8304       US$19.99




                                                                                              Alex Greene (order #3215550)             2.99.22
                                           ARMS OF

                 LEGEND
         Credits                                                                                Contents
         Authors                                                   Introduction                                   2
         Bryan Steele and Lawrence Whitaker

         Additional Text                                           Adventuring Gear and Basics 3
         Matthew Sprange, Nick Robinson, Gareth
         Hanrahan, August Hahn, Shannon Kavlar,
         Joseph Miller, Patrick Younts and Adrian Bott
                                                                   Trading and Quality                          38
         Developer
         Richard Ford                                              Armour                                       48
         Layout and Graphic Design
         Will Chapman                                              Weaponry                                     59
         Interior Illustrations
         Nick Egberts and Lorena Soriano                           Transport                                    90
         Proofreading
         Charlotte Law                                             Beasts and Cohorts                         119
         Special Thanks
         Pete Nash, John Hutchinson, Simon Bray,                   Enchantments                               138
         Jeff Richard and Greg Stafford

         Playtesting                                               Alchemy                                    150
         Christopher Morrell, Michael Parkin, James
         Lodge, Peter Schofield and Ron Carver


                                               Copyright Information
         Arms of Legend ©2012 Mongoose Publishing. All rights reserved. Reproduction of non-Open Game Content
          of this work by any means without the written permission of the publisher is expressly forbidden. Legend is
           presented under the Open Game Licence. See page 160 for the text of this licence. All text paragraphs and
         tables containing game mechanics and statistics derivative of Open Game Content and the System Reference
         Document are considered to be Open Game Content. All other significant characters, names, places, items,
               art and text herein are copyrighted by Mongoose Publishing. All rights reserved. Printed in USA




Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                            2
                               INTRODUCTION
       This expansion for Legend offers a comprehensive guide to all manner of equipment,
       armour, weapons and other commodities for use in Legend games. It is complete
       with all the characteristics needed for play and includes modifications to the core
       rules for special circumstances and other factors that equipment of various types
       may offer or impose.

       In addition to ‘standard’ equipment, the book also covers Enchantments and Alchemy,
       both of which are magical or semi-magical disciplines that have a direct effect on
       equipment or rely on it for success.

       Some of the items found herein are covered in the Legend Core Rulebook but much
       more is on offer besides. This book allows Games Masters and Adventurers access to
       a vast array of items for the specific purposes of adventuring and also for use in terms
       of background colour and information. Thus, Arms of Legend has much more to offer
       than simply being a catalogue of weapons and adventuring essentials.


       Culture and Availability
       Not every item in this book should be made available to Adventurers. Bear in mind
       the cultural and developmental limitations of your chosen campaign and its world.
       Black powder weapons, for instance, may have little or no place in your campaign.
       Similarly, Adventurers hailing from primitive cultures, or campaigns set in a primitive
       world, will have a far lesser range of goods available than those described here. Arms
       of Legend is therefore a toolkit for Games Masters to supplement their campaigns,
       and a reference for players on what to spend hard-earned or hard-won cash. Games
       Masters should be prepared to say No to players who, armed with this book, want
       to spend their money on items listed but are clearly restricted. Arms of Legend is a
       resource, not an entitlement.




  2
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                      2
         ADVENTURING GEAR & BASICS
         This chapter covers a vast array of items that could be considered the core equipment
         for many walks of life, but is primarily focused on the life of a questing Adventurer. The
         items themselves might be mundane and simple, but when used in specific ways they
         become useful tools.

         Also included in this chapter are extended descriptions and uses for the General
         Equipment found in Legend, placed and elaborated on here to make this book a ‘one-
         stop’ collection of Legend items currently published.


         The Essential Adventuring Kit
         The following list represents the Essential Adventurers’ Kit – for when a fast array of
         useful equipment is needed and players or their Adventurer do not have the time to
         select bespoke items.

         The kit, as an inclusive bundle, costs 70 silver and has a total ENC of 17.

         Item                                            ENC
         2 weeks trail rations                           1
         Animal Call/Whistle                             —
         Animal Snare/Trap x2                            4
         Backpack                                        1
         Bedroll                                         1
         Belt                                            —
         Boots (Common)                                  —
         Chalk                                           —
         Cloak (Common)                                  0.5
         Crowbar                                         1
         Flint, steel and tinder                         —
         Gloves (Common)                                 0.5
         Hammer                                          1
         Hand Mirror                                     —
         Pitons (5)                                      1
         Rope, 10m                                       2
         Sack (large)                                    1
         Spare water skin (empty)                        —
         String 5m                                       —
         Torches x2 (6 hours)                            2
         Water Flask (full)                              1
                                                                                                      3
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                              2
       Items by Description
       Acid, Vial: A simple vial of acid presents a multitude of uses. Acid can quickly eat
       through rope, soften up metal, ruin a lock or serve as an impromptu weapon. It can also
       be used to inflict damage on individuals or objects (see the Legend Core Rulebook).

       Altar, Portable: Designed with the travelling priest in mind, the portable altar is a heavy
       polished wood case, properly sanctified by the priest’s religion. Carefully engraved with
       the symbols and imagery of the church or cult, the heavy lid opens to reveal a silk-lined
       compartment designed to contain a large amount of religious paraphernalia. With a
       full stocked portable altar, a priest can hold services anywhere he travels and counts as
       a shrine for the purposes of learning Divine Magic.

       Altar Shroud: Similar to, but serving an almost opposite purpose from, an altar cloth,
       an altar shroud is a large piece of linen or silk hemmed in all four corners to form a
       cover for any size of altar. Often inscribed with religious symbols of protection and
       warding, these cloth wraps keep the radiance of a consecrated altar bound, preventing
       it from being detected magically. Religious ceremonies require that the shroud be
       removed, but when not in use, a shroud can protect an altar from unwanted attention.
       This item is often used by persecuted religions, allowing them to operate in areas where
       they would otherwise be quickly discovered and eliminated.

       Anatomy Kit: This kit of knives and sharpened flints incorporates only natural materials
       and very little metal. The mystical qualities of the items have been cleansed through
       intensive rituals and allow an individual to safely extract materials and body parts from
       creatures without contaminating them. The Adventurer using this kit receives a +10%
       bonus to all Heal Skill Tests made to extract materials from a dead creature.
  4
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                         2
         Animal Call/Whistle: This is a small wooden, bone or even metallic whistle or
         instrument used to make attractive sounds in the particular style of animal. Commonly
         used by hunters to attract prey, or by scouts to communicate signals to one another in
         non-verbal ways, animal calls are seldom larger than a hand’s span in size. Any Adventurer
         using an animal call to hunt can add +10% to his Survival skill for hunting purposes.

         Animal Snare/Trap: Using a coiled spring or a weight and pulley, the animal snare/trap
         is designed to snatch small game animals like hares or pheasant with remarkable force
         – possibly killing the animal with the rapidly yanking noose. Placing the trap requires
         a successful Survival Skill Test, which will be the opposed number for the Perception
         tests of the animal (or anything SIZ 3 or less) that might trigger it. If the animals loses
         the test, the snap will spring with an attack skill of 75%, which the animal must Evade
         or be held fast. The Hit Location snared will suffer 1D4 damage immediately and then
         be held two metres above the ground until released somehow.

         Anti-fungal Ointment: One of the greatest hazards of travel in any hot, wet environment
         (such as a jungle or a tropical swamp) is fungal infection. There are funguses that grow
         like thick orange fur, that explode in long black tubes after gestating for weeks, that
         cause the skin to become brittle and blue as it flakes off the bleeding muscles. Various
         spells can deal with most of these easily enough. However, a well-prepared Adventurer
         brings a supply of ointment with him that prevents these infections in the first place.
         Daily application of this preparation gives the Adventurer a +20% bonus to his
         Resilience skill when resisting fungal diseases. When purchased a jar of the ointment
         has enough material in it to provide protection for 10 days.

         Appraisal Kit: An appraisal kit contains a variety of tools for identifying substances,
         alloys and methods of manufacture. Using an appraisal kit grants you a +10% bonus
         to any Evaluate Skill Test to determine the value of a specific object. The kit contains
         enough disposable materials to be useful for 20 Skill Tests.

         Ashen Powder: Few city folk have the ability to track effectively, aiding a rogue greatly
         in his ability to evade pursuit. Unfortunately, town guards often have animals to help
         in this regard. A tenacious pursuit by hunting hounds can tax even the most agile thief.
         Ashen powder is a mixture of gem dust and chimney ashes meant to be scattered behind
         a running figure. When a creature that tracks by scent comes across a handful of ashen
         powder, it must make a Difficult Resilience Test. Failure indicates 1D3 of damage from
         the gem dust to the head and loss of any scent related tracking ability until the creature
         receives either magical healing or spends three days healing naturally.

         Back Travois: This device enables adventurers to more easily carry their fallen comrades
         out of hazardous areas so they may receive treatment in a more hospitable location. The
         back travois consists of a sturdy leather harness (straps and buckles allow the harness
         to fit bipedal creatures from small to large) and a set of jointed wooden poles. The
         harness and poles connect together to form a simple triangle that of wood and leather
         that can support creatures of size large or smaller. The open end of the triangle rests
         across the wearer’s shoulders, while the tip of the triangle drags on the ground behind
         – in most cases, the head of the fallen is positioned near the head of the wearer to
                                                                                                       5
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                               2
       avoid exacerbating any injuries. When wearing a back travois, an Adventurer’s carrying
       capacity is doubled and his movement rate is reduced by one-half. An Adventurer can
       only transport individuals that are no more than five SIZ larger than himself with a
       back travois.

       Backpack: This standard piece of adventuring equipment, held to the back with two
       shoulder straps, can hold 20 ENC of equipment. There is a more expensive version
       that has a reinforced frame, allowing for an additional 5 ENC of equipment to be
       strapped to the sides of the backpack as well, costing an additional 2 SP.

       Bag of Glass Beads: Bags of glass beads cut like gemstones have few legitimate uses.
       They are most commonly used by criminals to dupe the foolhardy into purchasing
       their precious gems. Additionally, an Adventurer can drop a real gem into the bag,
       shake it up and force someone searching the bag to make a Very Hard Evaluate Skill
       Test to spot the real gemstone, although someone with both time (at least one minute
       per gem, fake or otherwise) and skill will find it automatically. A bag of glass contains
       anywhere between 50 and 100 coloured glass gems of various sizes.

       Beads, Prayer: Also known as malas, these smooth, highly-polished beads are strung
       together on wires of precious metal and used to count mantras or prayers during
       religious ceremonies. Their distinctive clicking becomes greatly magnified during the
       performance of a hymn, serving to keep the congregation co-ordinated and focused.

       Bedroll: This includes a blanket and cushioned pad, usually carried tightly rolled and
       tied with a metre of leather cord. Without a bedroll, sleeping on the open ground does
       not count as complete rest for the purposes of healing or recovering from Fatigue. With
       1D6 minutes to unroll and lash properly, a bedroll can also be used as a stretcher in an
       emergency. More expensive bedrolls made of silks and furs are available for a premium
       but offer no special bonuses other than superior comfort and luxury.

       Besom: A ceremonial broom, the besom is used to ‘sweep’ negativity and lingering
       traces of energy out of a sacred space, cleansing it for a coming ceremony. During a rite,
       a besom is sometimes burned after use to negate the darkness it absorbed and banish
       whatever might still be lingering behind.

       Blackface: This cream paste is darkened through charcoal and sepia ink. Safe to apply
       in moderate amounts, blackface dyes the skin of any user jet black for four hours per
       application. This colour is extremely helpful for blending in with shadows, adding a
       +10% bonus to Stealth Skill Tests when shadows are a prevalent factor. The paste will
       survive immersion in water and it is only through rigorous cleaning that it can be
       removed prior to its normal four hour lifespan.

       Blade Sharpener: This V-shaped wooden handle is inset with abrasive stones angled
       specifically to give a blade an extremely sharp edge with practically no training on how
       to use it but repeated uses can make the temper on the blade brittle and easily blunted.
       Using the blade sharpener on any sort of non-iron bladed weapon (it has no effect on
       iron weaponry) for one hour restores one Hit Point to the weapon.
  6
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                        2
         Blessed Food: Many rituals and ceremonies require the participants to share in a
         meal. Largely symbolic, these meals mark an important point in religious services,
         often calling down the blessings of the divine upon those who partake of this specially
         prepared and blessed food. The exact form of blessed food relies largely on the religion
         in question.

         Block and Tackle: This is a mechanism of pulleys and counterweights useful for
         constructing traps, hauling up heavy items and so forth. It adds a +10% bonus to
         Mechanisms tests to make or disarm large traps and is required for some Engineering
         tests. If used in conjunction with a looped bottom for a climber’s foot, Athletics tests
         for climbing are also at +10%. A Block and Tackle requires at least 10 metres of rope to
         function and 10 minutes to set up and take down properly.

         Blood Decoy: In the waterways of the world there lurk a thousand dangers, each more
         terrible than the last. Fortunately the majority of these dangers are not malicious.
         They simply feed on whatever happens to be available. Intelligent travellers realise
         this and come prepared with blood decoys. Each decoy is a vaguely fist shaped object
         made of hard jelly. They smell a great deal like dried blood. When thrown into water
         (preferably far away from the area the traveller intends to cross) the decoy expands to
         several times its original size and gives off the unmistakable smell of blood. This lures
         the predators away from the travellers crossing point for 2D4 minutes.

         Body Sled: Measuring around two metres long, this sled can hold a creature of up to
         large size. Designed for pulling captured quarry, many use it instead to assist fallen
         comrades. The body sled increases the amount of ENC an Adventurer can carry
         without penalty by half, with any additional ENC above his normal maximum placed
         on the sled. If pulled over snow, the dragging load is doubled.

         Bottle, Glass: A blown bottle of clear or opaque glass, with stopper (cork or wood),
         that holds a litre of liquid.

         Branding Iron: For use with cattle, horses or slaves, the branding iron can be forged
         to apply a letter, symbol or family crest. Just heat and burn.

         Breath Bag: This thin air-filled bladder contains enough air to double the amount
         of time an Adventurer can stay underwater before he begins to drown. This item is
         particularly popular in underground and island settings, where the extra air can mean
         the difference between life and death.

         Bull-roarer: A musical wind instrument on the end of a long cord, a bull-roarer is played
         by spinning the instrument overhead quickly. The air passing through the weighed end
         creates a low, droning sound believed to be both attractive to good spirits and repulsive
         to bad ones. Some belief systems make a distinction between which direction a bull-
         roarer should be swung, with its effects reversing if used the wrong way.

         Candle, X Hour: From the small, stubby candle that will burn for one hour to the
         metre long illumination votive used in cathedrals and temples, candles are a useful
                                                                                                     7
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                             2
       source of light that can be used nearly anywhere. Originally used by miners to mark
       the passage of time while underground, many Adventurers have adopted them for the
       same purpose. They are inexpensive and useful, as a candle illuminates a one metre
       radius when lit. Any wind stronger than a slight breeze will undoubtedly extinguish
       any candle.

       Candle, Religious: A powerfully scented incense candle used in rituals and religious
       services all over civilisation, the powerful calming odour of the white smoke it gives off
       is said to help religious types find their centres and commune with their spiritual sides.
       Anyone of a specific religion who sits within one metre of a burning religious candle
       bought specifically for their faith regains one Magic Point every hour. The religious
       candle burns for six hours effectively, but due to the concentration of the scented oils
       in its creation, only 1D6 of them will possibly benefit the nearby faithful.

       Candle Snuff: A candle snuff resembles a clapperless bell on a long metal arm. Used
       to quench candles during a ceremony, the candle snuff exists because many spirits are
       believed to take offence at flames being put out with a person’s breath. It is also used
       in households where candles are lit out of reach and so require a toll to reach them in
       order to put them out.

       Candlemaking Kit: Good or evil, holy or profane, the shrines and temples of almost
       any deity can be noted by the large number of candles that burn within its confines.
       Whether as a symbol of hope, an accent on an altar top or simply for illumination,
       churches consume a considerable number of candles. A candlemaking kit is a must for
       any large temple, providing all the wicks, tallow or wax, and other accessories needed
       to produce 500 hours worth of candles before needing to be replaced.

       Cards: Cards are a more elaborate form of game of chance, readily available only in
       cultures that have some form of printing press technology (mundane or magical).
       Otherwise cards are for officers, gentlemen and the nobility. Typically made on a thick
       rag paper cards have a single blank or patterned side and a painted side showing a value
       and some sort of traditional motif.

       Chain: This is stout metal chain made of finger-wide links that can be used for countless
       different activities. It has an 4 AP and 8 HP per link, applying a –30% penalty to any
       Brawn Skill Tests to break. If used as a weapon, it inflicts 1D6 damage.

       Chalice: A large cup, usually fashioned of a precious metal, which is used to offer wine,
       blood, water, or other fluids to the gods during the performance of a hymn. When the
       hymn is completed, the congregation is often offered a drink from the chalice to seal
       their communion with their god.

       Chalk: A five centimetre length of white chalk, used for either marking or, with the
       use of a small grater (included in the cost), for filing into dust that can be scattered
       or tossed over other items, hands and so on to absorb moisture or highlight things
       difficult to otherwise see.

  8
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                        2
         Clay and Wax Box: Usually stored in a small iron case, this box consists of a pair of
         soft wax plates and a packet of fast hardening clay. To use a clay and wax box, a key is
         placed between the plates and the case is closed. When opened again, an imprint of
         both sides of the key remains behind. When clay is poured through a small hole in one
         side of the case, a false key is created. This clay key is crude, fragile, and only usable
         once, but it provides a +10% bonus to an Mechanisms Skill Tests made trying to open
         a lock the original key would open.

         Climbing Kit: This sack of tools consists of a leather harness, several short lengths of
         rope, pitons and a variety of other specific utensils. The climbing kit provides a bonus
         of +20% to any Athletics Skill Tests made to climb, but requires 2D6 minutes to don
         properly.

         Codex: This is a bound volume of 100 papyrus or parchment sheets. The price is for
         a blank codex; codices containing sage lore or runic spells are considerably pricier. Any
         sort of codex that contains enough information to be considered ‘Research’ for a skill’s
         Improvement Roll will easily cost five times the listed amount.

         Compass: Loadstone is a naturally occurring magnet that points towards the north
         when allowed to swing freely. A compass works by suspending a needle of loadstone in
         oil. This oil is sealed in a metal cylinder with a glass face. The user sits the compass on
         the ground. A few (1D4) rounds later the needle swings towards true north. Using a
         compass gives you a +30% bonus to any Skill tests made to determine direction.

         Craft Tools: This is a catch-all category for small satchels or cases containing portable
         tools appropriate to a particular Craft skill. These tools are often the bare minimum
         required to practise a craft without a skill penalty. A set of craft tools is useful for only
         one craft, which is specified upon purchase. An Adventurer must buy more sets of tools
         for any additional crafts he may wish to perform.

         Crowbar: This forged piece of angled metal adds +10% to Brawn Skill Tests to lever
         open doors, casket lids and the like. Objects not meant to be forcibly opened in this
         manner will suffer 1D6 damage. Also usable as a weapon, a crowbar is considered a
         club (wielded with a –10% penalty) with the ability to impale upon a critical hit.

         Crutches: Basically wooden poles with padded cups to go under the arms, crutches
         are designed to allow those with hurt or missing legs to keep a semblance of mobility.
         Using crutches requires a single Athletics Skill Test (+25%) but allows an Adventurer to
         move at up to half his normal rate with any amount of injury to one of his legs.

         Dice Set: A common diversion for many common folk after a hard day’s work, there
         are innumerable games of chance that may be played with dice.

         Doorjamb: This wedge of serrated metal is roughly the length of a man’s hand, with
         very rough rasps up and down two of its sides. It is used under a wooden door to keep
         it from opening. It takes two Combat Actions to place and hammer a doorjamb into

                                                                                                         9
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                 2
       place, but when it has bitten into the door and gripped the floor, it makes the door
       immobile without an Athletics roll pull the door open (with a –10% penalty).

       Dowsing Rods: This split stick made of specially treated wood and is used to find
       deposits of water or other hidden items. A dowsing rod can be used to help cast
       Common Magic spells, an Adventurer will gain a +10% bonus to his skill for casting
       Detect spells, as the rod focuses his magical energy. There are as many different types
       of dowsing rods as Detect spells, each will only provide the bonus for one of them.

       Dye, Coloured: Used for colouring clothing, hair or even skin, dye comes in a thick
       paste that must be spooned into a water-vinegar mix to dilute properly. Any object
       allowed to dry for 12 hours or so after soaking will take on the colour of the dye. If used
       on skin or hair, dye takes 1D6 weeks to lighten and eventually fade. Although dyes are
       available in an array of colours, the most common varieties are indigo blue, grape red
       and ivory yellow.

       Elven Bowstring: Made from the woven silk of treetop moths mixed with the sap
       resins of a dozen different trees found in many elven forests, these especially strong
       bowstrings are uncommonly quiet when released and remain slightly tacky to better
       hold an arrow in place while firing. An elven bowstring has a 75% chance of ignoring
       any form of physical damage from mundane sources, and adds +10 metres to the range
       of any Bow attacks.

       Erasing Broom: An erasing broom is a section of feathered wicker or straw bound with
       cord around a short wooden handle. An erasing broom can impose a –10% penalty to
       anyone attempting to visually Track the user. An erasing broom is too light and fragile
       to be an effective weapon.

       Everyday Tonic: This mixture of vitamins, minerals and other substances tastes foul
       but is said to add years to one’s life and keep the body fit and vigorous through the
       wonders of its unique blend of health-inducing sources. So long as the Adventurer
       wakes up to a spoonful of Everyday Tonic he actually only needs six hours of rest to
       be considered to have had a full night’s sleep. Also, he can add +10% to his Resilience
       skill to avoid catching any sort of mundane illnesses. These effects are only good for 24
       hours. Each bottle contains roughly thirty spoonfuls of tonic.

       Explosive Egg: An explosive egg is a unique espionage tool used to distract and frighten
       pursuers. Although its most famous users are the mysterious assassins known as the
       ninja, it has also seen use by several other lesser known organisations. An explosive egg
       is a hollowed out eggshell filled with a pinch of black powder and a handful of flour or
       dust. A thin square of paper is placed over the hole in the egg, with shell and paper held
       fast together by a gum made of sticky, smeared rice. To discharge an explosive egg, the
       user simply throws it, whereupon it explodes. When the egg breaks, the black powder
       explodes in a flash and flour fills the air in a thick cloud. Anyone within three metres of
       the egg must make an Evade Skill Test. If they succeed, they have successfully averted
       their eyes. If they fail the test, the combination of the explosive flash and the flour in
       the air blinds them for one Combat Round. The flour cloud disperses after 1d4 rounds.
 10
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                         2
         While the cloud remains, anyone within its three metre radius suffers a –10% penalty
         to all Perception Skill Tests.

         An explosive egg is very delicate. An Adventurer carrying an explosive egg who is
         struck in melee combat or affected by an area effect damaging spell risks having the
         egg explode prematurely. Each time he is struck by a melee weapon, there is a 20%
         chance that the egg detonates. If it does, he and all Adventurers within three metres
         must immediately attempt an Evade Skill Test as detailed previously. The owner of the
         egg suffers a –10% penalty to his Skill Test.

         Fairy Dust: Not created from actual fey creatures, fairy dust is made from ground
         crystals and herbal ingredients. Fairy dust is used during rites that draw upon the spirit
         plane. Some shamans also sprinkle fairy dust over projects to call upon the powers of
         inspiration and creativity. A shaman who uses fairy dust gains a +10% bonus to all Skill
         Tests relating to Spirit Magic.

         False Face Kit: This item is normally used on stage in more civilised areas, allowing
         the user to quickly change disguises during pauses in a play or production. The speed
         and efficiency of a false faces kit can be used by the less scrupulous for a rapid identity
         change on the run. Consisting of disguises stored in protective sections of a slender
         wooden case, the false face kit only provides three different facial disguises but each can
         be applied in only 1D3 minutes. Because the disguise is only to the user’s face, relying
         on it alone penalizes any Disguise Skill Test by –10%.

         Familiar’s Pack: A way for familiars and animal companions to travel in style, this pack
         is crafted to provide comfort and protection for its occupant. Food pouches, a bladder
         for water, and removable, washable bedding and litter collection are all amenities the
         familiar’s pack offers. If the familiar is subject to any attack that must pass through the
         pack to affect it, but gains a +50% bonus to any Evade Skill Test (normally the pack is far
         larger than the animal it contains and hitting the creature within can prove difficult). The
         familiar also benefits from the reinforced leather protecting it, giving it 3 AP in addition
         to any AP it may already have.

         Figurine: Many soldiers and artists make simple figurines of wood or stone. These
         keepsakes resemble good friends, comrades lost in battle, or other subjects that the
         buyer finds dear. Some are of more graphic nature, depicting well-known camp
         followers, enemies carved up in the heat of battle and other similar topics.

         Fins: Many costal people fit simple leather fins to their feet to enhance their ability
         to swim. These fins give the wearer a +10% bonus to Swim Skill Tests while worn but
         only if the Adventurer wearing them is unencumbered. Putting on fins takes two full
         rounds; one to remove your boots/shoes and another to fit the fins on. Wearing fins on
         land reduces your land speed by half.

         Fire Seed: Most experienced travellers do not try to restart their fire every night. Instead
         they carry a ceramic container called a fire seed, which contains several small holes to
         allow oxygen to fuel the fire. This container holds a single coal from the fire the night
                                                                                                        11
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                 2
       before. A fire seed can protect an ember for up to three days, but cannot withstand
       immersion of any sort. Even attempting the average water crossing with a fire seed can
       (if sufficiently damp) put the seed out. Starting a fire with a fire seed is much easier
       than with any of the more usual methods, giving the user a +10% bonus to any Skill
       Test required to start or maintain a fire.

       Fire Wheel: A small wooden disc with painted parchment tubes attached at radially
       opposite points, fire wheels are filled with black powder. When the powder tubes are
       ignited, they spew flames from one end, causing the disc to spin wildly and generate
       a high-pitched whistle. From a ceremonial standpoint, fire wheels are used to drive off
       negative influences and evil creatures who, theoretically, cannot stand the light and noise.

       First Aid Kit: Some first aid kits are made up primarily of bandages, tourniquets and
       herbal compresses. Others contain jars of leeches and maggots. Many contain salt sticks
       and fish oils for cleaning and sanitising. Whatever the composition, a first aid kit allows
       the owner to use the First Aid skill without penalty. A first aid kit is good for five uses
       (whether the Skill Test succeeds or fails) before it is used up. In some instances, first aid
       kits can be replenished after each use for 4 SP.

       Fish Hook: This is a small metal hook, sometimes barbed, which is used to catch fish.
       This item allows an Adventurer to use his Survival skill to catch a fish without suffering
       a penalty on the test. It does require some form of string, twine or rope to function.

       Fishing Kit: A boxed container consisting of 12 hooks, 10 metres of thin but strong
       line, a segmented rod and six corks, the fishing kit grants an Adventurer a +20% bonus
       to his Survival test to catch fish. The fishing kit is equipped to catch smaller fish of SIZ
       2 or less, but for every extra 10 SP spent adds 1 ENC to the kit but doubles the SIZ of
       fish that it can effectively handle.

       Flare Paste: Flare paste is a heavy black slightly sticky substance that comes in a thick
       glass jar. The jar contains enough of the paste to cover a three metre by three metre
       area. When ignited the paste burns for two rounds, doing 1d4 damage per round
       to any location touching it. The paste burns bright white and ignites any flammable
       materials that touch it while it burns.

       Flash Powder: This item is a small packet of gunpowder that produces a bright and
       smoky, but otherwise harmless, explosion when detonated. After using flash powder,
       an Adventurer may immediately attempt a Stealth Skill Test without penalty. The
       light and smoke from the flash powder distracts opponents, giving the Adventurer
       opportunity to use his skill.

       Flint and Tinder: The fastest and easiest way to start a fire without a hand-striker,
       an Adventurer with flint and tinder can build a fire in one minute under common
       conditions without having to roll his Survival skill. Games Masters may wish to impose
       penalties if the Adventurer is attempting to start a fire in a high wind, driving rain or
       without the best fire-making kindling/wood.
 12
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                           2
         Folding Stool: This cunning contraption uses canvas and several hinged metal legs to
         create a stable backless seat that can be easily folded up and packed. For an army on the
         move such a device is a luxury – seats are in short supply in a mobile army camp.

         Font, Great: In a shrine or temple, a font is a sacred fountain or pool that holds
         blessed water. During religious ceremonies, the water is often used to douse items or
         the faithful in the hopes of washing away impurities. A great font measures at least
         three metres by three metres and is usually deep enough to bathe in. In extremely large
         temples, it may even be deep enough to swim in or immerse animals like horses. Great
         fonts are used for extremely special rituals, ones that involve dozens or hundreds of
         participants who must receive the blessing that its depths can provide.

         Font, Portable: On the other end of the size scale from the great font is the portable
         font. Rarely larger than a soup tureen, portable fonts offer the ceremonial benefits of a
         font for small shrines and private gatherings.

         Footpads: Small sheets of layered fur and silk lashed under the user’s existing shoes or
         boots, footpads reduce the noise footfalls make by a remarkable margin. Although the
         items are heavier than they look, reducing the wearer’s movement by one metre per
         movement, they are exceptionally quiet and add +10% to Stealth for silent movement
         purposes.

         Glass Cutter: Only the very richest, and thus most successful, thieves will aspire
         to owning one of these wondrous devices. Padded with sound absorbing cloth, the
         wooden cone of the glass cutter conceals a diamond-tipped scoring blade wound by a
         handle. When placed against glass, a rogue merely need turn the handle, gently scoring
         the glass until a complete circular hole is cut, wide enough to allow the passage of arm
         and hand to snatch valuables or unlock windows. By placing gum on the surface of the
         wooden cone, a thief can ensure the that the cut glass does not accidentally slip from
         the cutter and break. The glass cutter is silent in use and requires an Adventurer to
         spend 1D6 Combat Rounds operating it to break through any glass surface no more
         than a quarter of an inch thick. A Mechanisms Skill Test is then made to determine
         whether the cut glass slips from the cutter and breaks, thus creating noise. The use of
         gum will cause this check to automatically succeed.

         Glass, Reflecting: A small mirrored piece of glass roughly the size of a man’s fist
         attached to a small handle, the reflecting glass can be used as a normal mirror in all
         ways but is designed to reflect around corners or over ledges. Using the glass requires
         a Perception Skill Test at –5% but allows the Adventurer to see in places he otherwise
         would not without risking his own head by looking.

         Grappling Hook: When tied to a rope, this angled piece of wrought metal can be
         lofted onto a battlement or similar ledge with a Throwing test. It will support the
         weight of 50 ENC or 50 SIZ, or any combination thereof at any given time, and
         requires a Brawn Skill Test (with a penalty equal to the ENC or SIZ on the rope at
         the time) to dislodge while in use. If used as a weapon, the grappling hook should be
         considered a club (with a –15% penalty).
                                                                                                     13
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                              2
       Grappling Hook, Assassin’s: Designed for quiet use by a single person, this small
       angled piece of strong metal can be lofted onto a battlement or similar ledge with either
       a Throwing or Ranged Combat Weapon (if fired from a bow or crossbow) test. It will
       support the weight of 20 ENC or 20 SIZ, or any combination thereof at any given
       time, and requires a Brawn Skill Test (with a penalty equal to the ENC or SIZ on the
       rope at the time) to dislodge while in use.

       Grindstone: Far superior to the labour-intensive whetstone, this mechanical device can
       return a decent cutting edge or thrusting point to the dullest of weapons. A whetstone
       may require over an hour’s work to sharpen the average sword – this grindstone can
       complete the task in a quarter of the time. A slashing or piercing weapon that is not
       kept in good order through the use of a whetstone or grindstone will gradually become
       duller, losing its edge or point. A –1 penalty to damage rolls will be incurred for every
       month the weapon is not sharpened.

       Hammer: Useful in a variety of capacities, a hammer is a tool no Adventurer should
       be without. If used as a weapon, it is treated as a club (wielded with a –10% penalty).
       Hammers may be used on inanimate objects without suffering damage in return, as
       they are designed to be used this way. Some hammers also have a sharp or wedge-like
       end to their heads, allowing them to be used as wedges or picks as well, but cost an
       additional 1 SP.

       Hand-striker: A curled handle of metal with a tiny inset piece of flint attached by a
       spring, the hand-striker is a fancy version of the flint and tinder (see above) wrapped up




Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                        2
         into a one-handed mechanism. It takes only 1D3 Combat Actions to make a sufficient
         spark with a hand-striker, but the pieces of flint must be replaced periodically or they
         become too ground and flat to spark. Replacement flints are 4 CP each.

         Handpouch: The best friend of pickpockets and shoplifters, a handpouch is a deep
         leather sleeve lashed to the underside of a thief ’s wrist with an opening at the heel of
         the hand. With practice a thief can become very adept at tucking small items into the
         opening and then moving the arm to deposit the item deep within the sleeve. Although
         this item does grant a +10% to all Sleight Skill Tests dealing with that hand and small
         enough items (coins, gems and so on), it does not silence them – so coin-nabbing
         thieves should be aware they will jingle if the handpouch gets too full.

         Healer’s Kit: A leather satchel stocked with bandages, mortar and pestle, poultices,
         barber’s tools, basic surgical equipment and everything else a healer might need to
         practise his trade on the road, a healer’s kit is necessary for an Adventurer to use the
         Healing skill. Unlike first aid kits, which have a set number of uses, a healer’s kit is more
         or less inexhaustible until a Games Master believes it is time to replace it.

         Horn, Hunting: Sounding a hunting horn signals allies or strikes fear in the heart of
         enemies. When this large horn is blown in the open wilderness, all creatures within a
         kilometre will hear its call. Those further away will hear it with a successful routine
         Perception Skill Test with the difficulty increasing by one factor for every additional
         kilometre beyond the first.

         Horn, Speaking: Similar to a listening cone but in reverse, the speaking horn is a
         simple wood or leather cone designed to amplify an Adventurer’s voice. An Adventurer
         using a speaking horn will be clearly heard up to a number of metres equal to his CON
         x10.

         Horse Nails: A rogue on foot is easily caught by enemies on horseback. Easily caught,
         that is, unless the rogue throws down these specialised caltrops while he is running.
         Large enough to be avoided by man-sized or smaller creatures, horse nails are designed
         to drive a long, thin spike up into the foot of any heavy being that steps on it. A
         single bag of horse nails will adequately cover a three by three metre area. Unless the
         victim makes a Simple Evade Test, horse nails inflict two points of damage to a creature
         running through them and reduce speed by half until any injury is healed.

         Hourglass: This specially blown tube of curved glass set into a wooden or brass frame
         is filled with fine sand that takes exactly an hour’s time to pass through. Fragile and
         easily disturbed, the hourglass is an important piece of equipment for alchemists, who
         need to keep track of reaction and application times for future notation and possible
         adjustments.

         Howler: A specially carved sphere of bone or wood tied to a length of rope or light
         chain, the howler makes a terribly loud and haunting wail like that of a great beast
         when twirled rapidly around the head. Used as a long-distance signal to groups of
         allied soldiers or scouts, the sound can be heard for five kilometres on a clear day. Also,
                                                                                                         15
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                  2
       the howling sound a howler emits will often keep most small predators and primitive
       humanoids from approaching the area without sufficient Persistence tests. Larger and
       more territorial predators, however, might believe a rival has challenged them and
       come to investigate.

       Icepick: A very narrow blade, usually edgeless and tapering to an extremely sharp
       point, mounted in a hiltless handle of wood or metal, an icepick is an effective tool
       in an emergency, doubling as an etching tool in adverse conditions for engraving.
       Due to their unwieldy nature, any activity taken with an icepick suffers a –5% skill
       penalty (unless, of course, that activity involves picking at ice).

       Icon: An icon is a form of religious imagery, usually crafted as a statue. Icons come
       in many different forms and sizes, from tiny statuary that can be carried in a priest’s
       pocket to massive glass windows that dominate an entire cathedral.

       Insect Netting: Those wishing to avoid the side effects of insect repellent may find this
       netting beneficial when they camp in swamps and other havens of small vermin. This
       silk netting can cover a single man-sized creature with ease and will protect against all
       biting and stinging insects.

       Insect Repellent: By liberally coating exposed flesh, an Adventurer can protect himself
       from most biting and stinging insects. Stinging vermin must succeed a Persistence
       Skill Test to approach within three metres of an Adventurer using insect repellent.
       Unfortunately, insect repellent has a similar affect against other creatures, conferring
       a –10% penalty to all Charisma-based Skill Tests relying upon interaction such as
       Influence or Seduction.

       Jacks: An evolution of the scatter sticks game jacks are twisted pieces of metal vaguely
       resembling caltrops. They come in sets of 20 with a single reasonably elastic ball. The
       goal is to bounce the ball and collect as many jacks as possible and still catch the ball
       before it hits the ground. Endless hours (and quite a bit of coin) can be spent playing
       jacks.

       Jailbreak Tools: A specialized set of thieves’ tools designed to deal with jail cell bars
       and heavy masonry, a rogue equipped with these can create enough of a hole in a stone
       wall or a metal door to attempt an escape in just 30 minutes. In circumstances where
       a rogue cannot access a lock to open, jailbreak tools allow at least a chance of egress.
       The tools give a +10% bonus to any Mechanisms or Brawn Skill Tests undertaken in
       the attempt to escape.

       Knockout Powder, Vial: This powder is made from a combination of chemicals that
       cause the inhaler to lose consciousness. Typically the powder is held in a small vial
       that is opened when the Adventurer wishes to use it and whipped into the face of the
       opponent. To deliver the knockout powder the Adventurer must make a successful
       unarmed attack. If successful the opponent must make a Difficult Resilience Skill Test
       or fall unconscious for 1d4 minutes.


 16
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                       2
         Ladder, 3 metre: A lashed or bolted wooden ladder used to climb flat surfaces can be
         used to ignore any penalties to Athletics climbing tests due to the nature of the surface.
         It can hold up to 60 ENC at any given time.

         Ladder, Grappling: This is a five metre rope ladder tipped with a pair of small bronze
         grappling hooks. A small tension wire allows for the hooks to be thrown as if they were
         grappling hooks (see above) using the Throwing skill. The rope ladder can hold up to
         25 ENC of weight before slipping its grip or rungs.

         Lantern, Basic: Most lanterns are made of brass or bone and use a leather or metal flap
         to shield the oiled or waxen mantle inside. A basic lantern provides clear illumination
         for a three metre radius. It will burn for two hours on a flask of oil.

         Lantern, Cowled: A cowled lantern is a smaller lantern that is always made from bronze
         and brass with a stiff leather hood that pulls back from its one main opening. Inside the
         cowled lantern is a ring of polished mirrors that reflect the light of the burning oil into a
         focused beam that comes out of the opening when the hood is pulled back. The beam of
         light from a cowled lantern extends 10 metres, but is only one metre wide. It will burn for
         one hour on a flask of oil.

         Lantern, Hanging: An extremely delicate and decorative lantern made of coloured
         paper and thin wood, a hanging lantern is used to cast a dim but pleasing glow to a
         large area. The coloured light from a hanging lantern provides hazy illumination up to
         a four metre radius. It will burn for three hours on a flask of oil.

         Listening Cone: A simple but highly useful device, this is a hollow cone made of wood
         or paper, though some may also be constructed out of shell. When placed against a door
         or wall, the listening cone amplifies muffled sounds, allowing a rogue to eavesdrop on
         conversations he may otherwise to be privy to. A listening cone grants a +5% bonus to
         all Perception Skill Tests made listening through doors and walls.

         Lock Picks: An item no self-respecting thief would ever be without, a set of lock picks
         allows an Adventurer to use his Mechanical skill to pick a lock. The Games Master may
         assign penalties or bonuses to this test based upon the specific circumstances.

         Magnifying Lens: Whether mounted on a handle or in a pair of wire frames to be
         worn as spectacles, this specifically shaped piece of ground glass is used to magnify
         writing, symbols or other tiny clues. While looking through the lens at anything within
         a distance of one metre, the Adventurer gets a +25% bonus to Perception. However,
         he suffers a –15% penalty to Perception tests concerning everywhere else. Also, a
         magnifying lens held still and fed sufficient light from the sun or other remarkable
         source can create a heat source that can ignite flammable objects.

         Marbles: This bag of a 100 or so marbles can provide a different, and sometimes
         amusing, alternative to cruel caltrops. One bag of marbles will cover a three metre


                                                                                                         17
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                  2
       square area. Any Adventurer moving into this area at more than a quarter of their base
       speed must make a Routine Evade Skill Test or immediately fall prone. Those running
       or charging into the area must make a Hard Evade Skill Test.

       Milling Stones: This is a hand-held pair of grinding stones that can be loaded with spices,
       grains and minerals to be turned to powder. Milling stones are helpful for alchemists,
       healers, shamans and magicians to have a source for their various and sundry ingredients
       while on the road. The grinding process takes less than a few minutes for most substances,
       but could take hours for gemstones or other extremely hard materials.

       Mining Pick: A cross between a spade and a mattock, a mining pick allows its user to
       chip his way through rock (albeit quite slowly). If used as a weapon, it is considered a
       club (wielded with a –10% penalty). Mining picks may be used on inanimate objects
       without being destroyed.

       Musical Instrument: A musical instrument of basic quality such as a lute, small harp,
       drum, and so on. Small musical instruments such as simple pipes and recorders cost
       approximately a quarter of the price and have no ENC.

       Net, Fishing: This a two metre by two metre weighted net of woven fibres designed
       to be dropped into standing or running water to catch fish, crustaceans and the like,
       for food. It takes 3D10 minutes to use the net properly, but adds a +25% bonus to the
       Adventurer’s Survival skill for the purposes of catching food in this way.

       Net, Handled: A fine, mesh netting mounted on a wooden hoop set with a long
       handle, this net is designed to capture tiny creatures such as butterflies, rats and other
       pests. Use of a handled net counts as its own Combat Style with DEX x2 as the basic
       skill percentage. It may only be used against creatures of SIZ 1.

       Noble Seal: Often built into a fine piece of jewellery, an expensive handle or chain
       necklace, every noble line has some form of crest that can be carved in reverse into a
       signet seal. These seals can be used to press waxen drops to close letters, scrolls or other
       similar objects. Recognising a specific noble family or bloodline by its seal requires a
       Lore (World) Skill Test (modified as the Games Master sees fit). Also, anything that has
       been sealed in this way can only be opened by breaking the seal unless arcane methods
       are used.

       Oar, Collapsible: A hinged piece of metal with a wide wooden end that snaps open to
       a half-metre length, the collapsible oar gives a +5% to Boating due to its lightweight
       and expertly crafted design. When used in combat, the collapsible oar acts as a club
       (with a –10% penalty).

       Oil, Flask: A single flask of oil is enough to fuel a basic lantern for two hours, or, if
       broken on the ground and ignited, enough to sustain a small fire for one minute. Oil
       is packaged in small pottery containers or glass bottles, but can also occasionally be
       found in waxed leather skins. A skin cannot be ‘broken’ as mentioned above – either
       on purpose or accidentally.
 18
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                          2
         Oil, Jellied: Mixing sawdust, chalk or hoof shavings into common lamp oil slowly
         over a period of time can eventually create a combustible jelly that is very useful for
         smearing on torches and other objects that are to be set alight at a later time. A single
         spark will light jellied oil on fire, and it will then burn as if it were a common flask of
         oil. After it has been smeared onto something, jellied oil stays combustible for up to a
         week before it begins to lose its potency.

         Oil, Weapon: Used to keep rust and tarnish off the precious edges of bladed weapons,
         weapon oil is extremely thin and is made primarily from the rendered fat and oils
         from fish or whales. It is relatively odourless and carries with it only a very slight
         yellowish tint. It is only slightly more flammable than cooking oils, and a single
         bottle of it can upkeep dozens of weapons for weeks at a time. Any blade treated
         with weapon oil after it has been used in combat will not suffer from mundane rust
         or tarnish for a week or so.

         Offering Bowl: Decorated with religious symbols, offering bowls serve a vital function
         during ceremonies by providing a receptacle for gifts made directly to the deity itself.
         Small samples of ritual food and drink are sometimes placed in offering bowls as a
         symbol of feeding them directly to the divine. Other times, wealth is placed within
         them as a way of supplicating worshipped beings for their blessing. After a ceremony,
         anything in a collection bowl is burned as a sign of divine acceptance.

         Papyrus Sheet: A papyrus sheet is a sheet of thin, brittle paper useful for taking notes,
         drawing maps or even making a rubbing of a raised surface. It is painstakingly made
         from papyrus reeds and is considered a luxury item by most common people. A sheet
         of papyrus is square, half a metre by half a metre. Once written on, a papyrus sheet can
         be ‘waxed’ to make the ink water resistant and smear-proof, though this also makes the
         sheet more flammable should it ever be exposed to an open flame.

         Parasol: Used by circus performers as a balance aid, parasols are surprisingly effective
         in this role. Small umbrellas weighted around their edges to provide a counterweight,
         parasols are often made of resistant materials that can function admirably as small
         shields. While they do occupy one hand, parasols add a +10% bonus to Acrobatics
         Skill Tests.

         Pendulum: An ornate weight depending from a length of chain or rope, the pendulum
         is most often fastened to the ceiling of the sanctuary. During a hymn, a priest sets the
         pendulum swinging as a way to help the congregation enter a meditative or trance
         state.

         Pepper: The black gold of the world, pepper is a small dried fruit coming from a
         vine. It has a very pungent flavour, capable of disguising even the most dreadful tastes
         and smells. Heavy peppering of food provided anyone who tastes or smells the food
         a –20% penalty on any roll to detect a single flavour (like a poison or potion) in the
         food. If spread to cover a trail Pepper also causes any animals tracking by scent to
         suffer a 50% penalty to their Track skill.


                                                                                                       19
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                2
       Poison Antidote Kit: This addition to a standard healer’s kit allows an Adventurer to
       treat poisons with greater efficiency. Each kit contains enough supplies to deal with ten
       poisoning cases, after which the healer will need to restock. When using this kit, the
       Adventurer receives a +20% bonus to any Healing Skill Tests made while treating an
       Adventurer suffering from poison damage.

       Pole, 3 Metre: This item serves many useful purposes, from testing the stability of the
       ground ahead, knocking unreachable objects down to awaiting hands, to functioning
       as a crude yoke over an Adventurer’s shoulders. The pole is not built for combat, but
       could be used as an unwieldy staff (with a –10% penalty) if necessary.

       Pottery Wheel: A large wooden device with a swinging plank tethered to a spinning
       table surface, the pottery wheel not only allows for faster uses of the Craft (Pottery)
       skill, but grants a +10% bonus as well. A pottery wheel is unlikely to be very mobile,
       and is often placed in a potter’s workshop or artisan’s room.

       Preservative Fluid: This alchemical concoction is useful for preserving organic tissue
       for long periods of time. A litre of the fluid can be used to preserve a kilogram of
       flesh, organ or a small creature for a year, after which it will be necessary to drain the
       preservative fluid and replace it with a fresh solution.

       Preserving Kit: A preserving kit includes salt, a variety of sheets of varying layers, a
       tool for creating sawdust, jars and other assorted preserving supplies. Using it provides
       the tools needed for any Skill Test involving the preservation and long-term storage of
       food. The kit is good for 10 uses.

       Quenching Blanket: This is a thick, twin-layered woollen blanket interwoven with
       pockets of bone-chips and other fire resistant materials, sewn in with weighted edges.
       It can be tossed with a Throwing action onto any non-magical fire up to two metres in
       diameter, which it will smother in 2D3 Combat Rounds. If the blanket has not put the
       fire out in that time, it is likely the blanket has caught fire.

       Quick Sheath: This is a common sword or other straight-bladed weapon’s sheath with
       an additional clasp and brass mechanism at the top. Using spring tension, the quick
       sheath partially ejects a weapon for faster drawing. Held in place by a small metal clasp
       that can be thumbed open, the Adventurer that uses a quick sheath adds +1 to his
       Strike Rank at the beginning of any combat in which his weapon is already sheathed.
       Because of the spring and clasp, it takes two Combat Actions to replace a weapon in
       the quick sheath.

       Quick Sheath, Wrist: Basically a smaller version of the normal quick sheath, but
       strapped to the forearm of the user, the wrist quick sheath can only hold straight-
       bladed items of less than one ENC. In addition to the bonuses of a normal quick
       sheath, this version allows the wearer to draw this weapon with the flick of his wrist –
       which is considered automatic, does not cost an action and does not provoke Combat
       Reactions. Also, it offers +10% to any Sleight Skill Tests to hide the sheath’s weapon.


 20
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                        2
         Quiver: A very basic item used to carry ammunition for bows and crossbows, a quiver
         can generally hold up to 30 arrows or crossbow bolts. Quivers are commonly cylindrical
         in shape with some kind of shoulder or belt strap to hold them fast to the wearer. Some
         come with detachable lids or covers in order to keep fletching dry in bad weather, but
         these versions take an extra Combat Action to open if the wearer is caught unawares.

         Rangeglass: A spyglass with a long sighting bar hinged to one side, a rangeglass
         requires 14 Intelligence to use effectively. By noting shadows along the sighting bar
         and performing a set of calculations, the user of a rangeglass can calculate the exact
         distance to a viewed object. Rangeglasses do not make objects appear any closer and
         require natural sunlight or moonlight to work.

         Razor, Folding: The mainstay of any barber’s tools, the folding razor is the best
         implement to painstakingly remove three-day old stubble before a noble’s ball or shear
         through a piece of cloth or rope in a hurry. Useful in a variety of ways, the razor can
         also be used to inflict rather nasty wounds on bare flesh – inflicting 1D3 damage upon
         scoring a hit on an unarmoured Hit Location. Armour of any kind stops this damage
         completely and dulls the blade considerably. Apart from the damage, a folding razor
         has the same statistics as a dagger.

         Relic Case: This heavy case is lined with numerous straps and cushions that can be
         used to safely transport relics from one location to another. While the case was designed
         specifically for relics, any other item placed within will be safe from breakage unless the
         case itself is destroyed. The wide variety of buckles and different cushion sizes allows
         any item of up to one metre in length and half that in width to be secured within.

         Relic, False: It is an unfortunate truth that some merchants will do anything to make
         a living, even sell replicas of religious relics while claiming them to be authentic. False
         relics are usually only seen in small, rural villages with no direct representatives of the
         religions involved, as a true priest devoted to the relic in question can instantly tell
         its falsehood by succeeding at a Lore (religion) Skill Test. Some false relics are of far
         superior quality and spotting them may require a Skill Test of greater difficulty, making
         detection far less likely.

         Relic, True: True relics are extremely rare, consisting largely of the body parts and
         personal possessions of the long-gone saints, prophets, and martyrs of a religion. These
         items are sometimes grisly, but body parts are usually contained in sanctified jars called
         reliquaries. True relics always count as holy symbols and can increase the effectiveness
         of a religious centre for the purpose of learning Divine Magic (so a shrine will be as
         effective as a minor temple and a minor temple as a major temple).

         Retracing Tool: Designed by an ingenious miner who discovered how easy it is to get
         lost in a tunnel network, the retracing tool is basically a very hard metal spike with
         an angular tip similar to a chisel and a leather-wrapped handle. By dragging the edge
         of the tool back and forth across the wall of a cavern or similarly confusing enclosed
         structure, an easily recognised line can be made. A few more scratches and the line
         becomes an arrow. Following these arrows back the way they point from should get an

                                                                                                       21
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                2
       Adventurer back to his original point of entry. An Adventurer who uses the retracing
       tool on every corner or turn, or every ten metres will gain a +25% bonus to any skills he
       uses to find his way out of the structure/network. Unfortunately, it also grants the same
       bonus to any Tracking Skill Tests used to follow the Adventurer’s progress.

       Ring, Bladed: This small, nondescript band of gold- or silver-coated bronze hides
       a cleverly disguised razor edge. The edge is too small to inflict serious damage on
       flesh, but sloppy use could open several small and painful cuts on the user’s hand. The
       wearer of the bladed ring can add a +15% bonus to his Sleight skill for the purposes of
       escaping bonds that may be cut through.

       Rope, 10 Metres: Essential equipment for any Adventurer worth his salt, standard
       hemp rope can support the weight of 50 ENC or 50 SIZ, or any combination thereof.
       If knotted properly, hemp rope loses three metres of length but can add 10% to the
       user’s Athletics Skill Test for the purposes of climbing.

       Rope, Silken: Lighter, stronger and less abrasive to the skin, silken rope is superior to
       braided hemp in nearly every way. Like its more common cousin it comes in 10 metre
       lengths, but can support 60 ENC or 60 SIZ, or any combination thereof. Silken rope
       requires more knots to make it more usable for climbing purposes, shortening it by
       four metres.

       Sack, Large: This is a wide sack of leather or canvas with one or two openings that
       buckle or tie, able to hold 10 ENC of equipment. Large sacks are almost always sewn
       with shoulder straps or loops to be tied to a saddle.

       Sack, Secure: A wide and flat version of the small sack designed to strap to a person’s
       stomach in the same fashion that a girdle would. It has the same capacity as a small
       sack, but requires much more work to get to, as it is worn under clothing. It grants a
       +10% bonus to Sleight Skill Tests in order to remain hidden while worn.

       Sack, Small: A small sack is an over-the-shoulder bag made of leather or sometimes
       canvas, similar in design to a large sack. It can hold 5 ENC of equipment, and rarely
       has more than one opening, which may be buttoned.

       Salt Tablets: Salt is one of the single most important spices in the world. Highly useful
       in preserving, it is as an essential ingredient in the diets of most mortal races. Taking
       a salt tablet once a day gives a travelling Adventurer a +10% bonus to Resilience Skill
       Tests to resist the effects of forced marches, desert travel and long term exposure to
       extremes of heat. There are 25 salt tablets in each packet.

       Saw, Hand: This long piece of hammered metal has been sharpened to have a jagged
       and serrated edge perfect for cutting through wood, which is attached to a leather-
       wrapped handle. With enough strokes back and forth, the hand saw can cut through
       wood at a rate of 1D4 Hit Points per round – ignoring AP from the wooden object. If
       used as a makeshift weapon it can be used as a crude short sword (with a –15% penalty)
       but will likely never be usable as a saw again.

 22
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                       2
         Scatter Sticks: One of the first and earliest games, sticks has remained popular because
         of its endless entertainment value. A pack of sticks allows a group of men to burn hours
         in constant play. The winner of a game is determined by a contested Sleight Skill Test.

         Scourge: These short leather whips often have multiple heads and are used by
         worshippers to demonstrate their physical and mental discipline. By flogging themselves
         with a scourge, the worshippers are also able to heighten their own concentration on
         the task at hand while simultaneously displaying their devotion.

         Scrollcase: A simple, hollow leather or bone tube designed to hold rolled-up sheaves of
         parchment, a scrollcase is a handy tool for preserving and protecting magical scrolls. A
         spell or attack must destroy the case before it can deal damage to the scroll inside. Each
         scroll case may hold three scrolls.

         Scrollcase, Watertight: Constructed out of tin, the caps at either end of this scroll case
         are sealed with wax to prevent water running inside and ruining the contents. Such
         items are much sought after at sea, for they are the only realistic way to protect maps
         and magical scrolls from damage.

         Scythe: Primarily a tool for harvesting grain, a scythe can be put to work as a weapon
         when necessary. If used as a weapon, it is considered a bill (wielded with a –10%
         penalty). The image of the scythe has been tied to various dark ideas such as death,
         the apocalypse and so forth. Wielding a scythe openly adds a +10% bonus to the
         user’s Influence skill for the purposes of intimidation only.

         Sea Chest: A commonplace item, found within the cabins of all captains and regular
         sea travellers, a sea chest is an innocuous looking item large enough to hold most of
         a person’s valued possessions. However, it is extremely well constructed and is able to
         resist being fully submerged in water, keeping its contents dry and safe. There are many
         oft-told tales of a ship sinking with the only remains found being a sea chest floating on
         the waves, still holding a doomed sailor’s most prized possessions.

         Sea Salt: Collected from salt water, sea salt is generally purchased as large, composite
         crystals and ground during meditations before a ritual. Used in many different ways, sea
         salt is most often called upon in its capacity to cleanse dark energies from ceremonial
         tools and spaces. Sea salt is preferred over other forms of salt because of its association
         with water, the element of life.

         Sighting Lens: A clever invention, the sighting glass consists of two or more lenses
         held fast within a leather sheath. By looking through the sighting glass, distant objects
         are greatly magnified and brought into focus. An Adventurer using a sighting lens will
         give a +20% bonus to any Perception Skill Test when trying to spot objects more than
         100 metres away.

         Skates: These are hard leather shoes with sharp blades fixed to their soles. With
         practice, an individual will find he can move quickly and easily across ice covered
         terrain, at far faster rates than if he were walking. Skating is an advanced skill using
                                                                                                       23
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                2
       DEX x2. An Adventurer who successfully passes a Skating Skill Test or has a higher
       than 50% skill will be able to double his normal movement rate when using them on
       ice or a similar substance.

       Skis: Simply in concept, hardwood skis are essential devices when travelling across
       snow and they include two poles to aid balance. A practised individual will find he
       can move normally across snow (no movement penalty) on flat ground and greatly
       increase his speed downhill. Skiing is an advanced skill using DEX x2. An Adventurer
       who successfully passes a Skiing Skill Test or has a higher than 50% skill will be able
       to double his normal movement rate when moving downhill and using them on snow
       or a similar substance.

       Sleeping Draught: This packet of bitter herbs contains within it powerful sleeping
       drugs. After drinking a mug of something with a full packet in it you must make a
       Resilience Skill Test or fall into a deep sleep. You may choose to forego this save if you
       wish to get a full night sleep. Drinking this draught allows the user to rest fully despite
       any troubles he may otherwise have. In order to wake up before a full eight hours has
       past the imbiber must make a Difficult Resilience Skill Test.

       Slingbag: Also called a ‘shoulder satchel,’ this is a simple leather carryall with a long
       strap to go over one shoulder. It can carry 15 ENC of equipment. It rarely has any type
       of buttoning flap, merely a leather cord to tie it closed.

       Snow Guards: These opaque goggles have a narrow horizontal slit cut out of the centre
       of each eye covering. This gives the wearer a –20% penalty on all Persistence Skill Tests.
       It also grants him a +20% bonus to any Resilience Test to avoid being blinded by light
       or to resist snow-blindness.

       Snowshoes: Made of hard-wearing wood, these snowshoes greatly increase the surface
       area of an Adventurer’s tread in arctic conditions, thus greatly improving the ease of
       travel over snow. An Adventurer wearing snowshoes will halve any movement penalty
       when travelling over deep snow.

       Sounding Drum: When surrounded by thick jungle or forest it can be almost impossible
       to get information to or to coordinate the activities of several groups. The sounding
       drum provides a solution to that. Although not well suited to music this one metre tall
       drum produces a deep, resonate note that can be heard from up to five kilometres away.
       Setting up the drum is a full round action; sounding it requires another.

       Spade: This is a small shovel, sometimes with a detachable wooden handle. It can be
       used to dig large amounts of soil or sand in relatively short order, but is all but useless
       on stone or very dense earth. If used as a weapon, it is considered a club (wielded with
       a –10% penalty).

       Spices: Much food has long been noted for both its filling qualities and its incredible
       blandness. Merchants reacted to this early on by providing spices designed to make


 24
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                         2
         food more palatable. Each blend of spices is somewhat different. A single packet of
         spices contains enough spice to flavour 30 meals.

         Stocks: A common feature of even the smallest village, the stocks are an excellent way
         to hold lawbreakers fast and ensure they realise the errors of their ways. This is a simple
         wooden framework with a two part upright panel that holds both head and hands
         securely. A lock is included, although its quality may vary.

         Tent, 4 Person: This folding canvas tent can be set up in just a few minutes, and
         will keep up to four human-sized people dry. It is not exceptionally comfortable,
         which is why so many Adventurers invest in good bedrolls and warm clothing for long
         journeys.

         Tent, 8 Person: Held up by five poles that must be securely driven into the ground,
         this tent can be set up in just under an hour by two men. Once erected properly, up to
         eight human-sized individuals can sleep inside without fear for most normal weather
         conditions. Some eight person tents have waxed awnings to run off rain and snow, but
         most just use the inherent angle of the canvas flaps to ward off wet weather.

         Thurible: Also known as a censer, this is a metal vessel designed for the ceremonial
         burning of incense. The thurible is suspended on long chains, which are used to gently
         swing the vessel from side to side, dispersing the fragrant smoke of burning incense
         throughout the temple.

         Torch, 1 Hour: A torch has one end wrapped in cloth and dipped in pitch, oil or other
         similar flammable substance. It can be lit with flint and tinder in one round, or in one

                                                                                                       25
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                2
       Combat Action with a hand-striker, and will burn for one hour. A lit torch illuminates
       a three metre radius. If used as a weapon, it is considered a club (wielded with a –10%
       penalty), except that it does not inflict normal damage – instead, it inflicts 1D4 fire
       damage and a fumble or critical hit will also extinguish the brand.

       Torch, 6 Hour: This is a large metal-capped wooden pole that contains a supply of
       oil (two flasks) in its decanted end. Other than functioning as a staff instead of a club,
       and burning for six hours instead of one, this item has the same characteristics as the
       one-hour variety.

       Torch, Waterproof: Using alchemical additives soaked into the torch, then sealed in
       with pitch and wax, the waterproof torch burns with a strange sparking flame that is
       extremely hot and hard to look directly into. However, as the name implies, there is
       only a 15% chance that any source of water will be able to extinguish the chemical
       flame per round of exposure. The sparking and sizzling flame lasts for 30 minutes, and
       subtracts 10% from the holder’s Perception skill. Also, should the waterproof torch
       ever be used as a club, it inflicts 1D6 fire damage instead of the regular 1D4.

       Travois: A travois is two wooden bars with a tarp slung between them in a triangular
       shape. The narrow end of the travois has a strap that can be attached to an animal’s
       shoulders or pulled across a Medium sized creature’s chest. Cargo can be loaded onto
       the canvas section of the travois. Using a travois triples the carrying capacity of those
       using one, but at the cost of being forced to move at a maximum of half their speed.

       Tree Net: This is a toughened hide attached to a folding framework of thin wood that,
       when opened and attached to suitable branches, allows an Adventurer to sleep within
       a tree without fear of falling out. The advantages of sleeping within trees while in the
       wilderness are obvious, for many travellers have fallen prey to the monstrous predators
       that stalk the ground.

       Underwater Goggles: A pair of leather-rimmed cups with polished glass lenses fitted to
       a leather strap, underwater goggles allow the wearer to see easily in the murky depths.
       This reduces any Perception penalties to the wearer by –10% while underwater.

       Walking Stick: This short, stout wooden rod is normally capped with a bronze or iron
       tip. While useless in combat, a walking stick provides a +10% bonus to Acrobatics Skill
       Tests if its bearer uses it to brace himself against the ground with it. The stick provides
       this bonus applies only if the Acrobatics Skill Tests was forced by unsteady ground, an
       earthquake or similar event - the walking stick is useless when making a Acrobatics
       Skill Tests to walk a tightrope, for example. If used in combat, a walking stick counts
       as a club.

       Water Additive: This small vial of pure alcohol can be added to pools of brackish
       water, thereby making it fit for consumption. Only needs one drop is required for every
       half pint of water. Any required Resilience Test for consuming such water is receives a
       +10% bonus if the additive has been used. Water additive only works against potential
       diseases, not poisons.

 26
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                         2
         Water Pack: This heavy pack consists of a tar and wax sealed leather waterskin attached
         to two straps. It allows its user to carry up to 25 litres of water.

         Water Trap: A water trap is comprised of several large, waxed sheets of tarp as well as
         a three metre square wooden frame and a simple ceramic container. Each night when
         the water trap is spread out it collects dew and rolls it down into the container. Every
         night the trap collects 1D4-1 daily rations of water for men or beasts.

         Waterskin: A waterskin is a lined bladder or sewn leather pouch designed to contain
         liquids, with a wooden or bone spout at one end for pouring. A typical waterskin can
         hold enough water to sustain an Adventurer for two days, but can also be used to hold
         wine, poison or other liquids equally well.

         Wax, Block: Used for a variety of reasons in several professions, beeswax is much like
         rope in that many Adventurers find ways to put it to inventive use. Thieves will press
         keys into it in order to make effective forgeries, alchemists might need it to seal up
         potions or component bottles, and archers might want to wax the fletching on their
         arrows for faster flight.

         Weatherproofing Kit: Containing oils, waxes, resins and buffing pads, this kit can
         be used to keep the rigours of common weather from harming any wooden or leather
         objects for weeks at a time. By applying the specific components to the goods in
         question, the items will not suffer damage from commonplace weather for seven days.
         Each kit can weatherproof 100 ENC worth of items before it is used up.

         Wine, Ritual: Wine is used in rituals to symbolise blood, especially during rites that
         would be tainted by the shedding of actual vital fluids. Blessed during a ceremony, wine
         is often used to anoint objects, denote lines of power, and imbibed to gain the favour
         of the divine. While used in this capacity, any spilling of sacred wine is considered an
         extremely bad omen and is usually grounds for invalidation of the entire ritual.

         Writing Kit: The basic writing kit contains several vials of black ink, as well as brushes,
         quills and pens used for calligraphy and scribing. The largest part of the kit is a thin
         sheet of wood, the same dimensions as a piece of papyrus. For an additional cost
         writing kits can also contain coloured inks, but these are often saved for tattoo artists
         or noble scribes.

         Yarn, 50 metres: Spun from goat, lamb or yak’s wool, yarn is the primary component
         in knitting and many of the tailoring trades. Although not as strong as twine or leather
         cord, yarn can be used in a pinch to tie objects or reinforce clothing tears, but is also
         known to be useful as a trail to follow in extremely dark settings such as caverns or
         labyrinths.




                                                                                                       27
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                2
       Adventuring Gear and Basic Items
       Item                    ENC   Cost     Item                         ENC   Cost
       Acid, Vial              1     20 SP    Dowsing Rod                  1     300 SP
       Altar, Portable         3     300 SP   Dye, Coloured                1     13 SP
       Altar Shroud            2     50 SP    Elfen Bowstring              —     150 SP
       Anatomy Kit             1     50 SP    Erasing Broom                1     2 SP
       Animal Call/Whistle     —     1 SP     Everyday Tonic               1     10 SP
       Animal Snare/Trap       2     7 SP     Exploding Egg                —     10 SP
       Anti-fungal Ointment    1     25 SP    Fairy Dust                   —     15 SP
       Appraisal Kit           2     25 SP    False Face Kit               1     150 SP
       Ashen Powder            —     20 SP    Familiar’s Pack              1     15 SP
       Back Travois            3     30 SP    Figurine                     —     2 SP
       Backpack                1     5/7 SP   Fins                         1     20 SP
       Bag of Glass Beads      —     10 SP    Fire Seed                    —     2 SP
       Beads, Prayer           —     30 SP    Fire Wheel                   1     10 SP
       Bedroll                 1     1 SP     First Aid Kit                —     25 SP
       Besom                   —     5 SP     Fish Hooks (5)               —     1 CP
       Blackface               —     10 SP    Fishing Kit                  1     15 SP
       Blade Sharpener         2     10 SP    Flare Paste                  —     12 SP
       Blessed Food            1     2 SP     Flash Powder                 —     2 SP
       Block and Tackle        1     15 SP    Flint and Tinder             —     5 CP
       Blood Decoy             —     5 CP     Folding Stool                1     15 SP
       Body Sled               4     60 SP    Font, Great                  30    1,000 SP
       Bottle, Glass           —     2 SP     Font, Portable               1     150 SP
       Branding Iron           1     3 SP     Footpads                     1     12 SP
       Breath Bag              —     4 SP     Glass Cutter                 —     10 SP
       Bull-roarer             1     8 SP     Glass, Reflecting            1     20 SP
       Candle, 1 hour          —     1 CP     Grappling Hook               —     5 SP
       Candle, 2 hour          —     3 CP     Grappling Hook, Assassin’s   —     20 SP
       Candle, 6 hour          1     1 SP     Grindstone                   8     20 SP
       Candle, Religious       —     10 SP    Hammer                       1     1 SP
       Candle Snuff            —     2 SP     Hand-striker                 —     3 SP
       Candlemaking Kit        2     50 SP    Handpouch                    —     5 SP
       Cards                   —     10 SP    Healer’s Kit                 1     150 SP
       Chain, 2m               2     40 SP    Hourglass                    1     20 SP
       Chalice                 1     100 SP   Horn, Hunting                1     8 SP
       Chalk                   —     5 CP     Horn, Speaking               1     5 SP
       Clay and Wax Box        1     40 SP    Horse Nails                  1     15 SP
       Climbing Kit            1     25 SP    Howler                       —     6 SP
       Codex                   1     60 SP    Icepick                      —     6 SP
       Compass                 —     100 SP   Icon                         1     200 SP
       Craft tools             2     75 SP    Insect Netting               1     300 SP
       Crowbar                 1     25 SP    Insect Repellent             1     2 SP
       Crutches                2     8 SP     Jacks                        —     1 SP
       Dice Set                —     1 SP     Jailbreak Tools              1     40 SP
       Doorjamb                2     5 SP     Knockout Powder, Vial        1     80 SP



 28
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                2
         Item                  ENC   Cost        Item                     ENC   Cost
         Ladder, 3m            4     2 SP        Sack, large              1     5 CP
         Ladder, Grappling     3     8 SP        Sack, Secure             —     1 SP
         Lantern, Basic        1     10 SP       Sack, Small              —     2 CP
         Lantern, Cowled       1     12 SP       Salt Tablets             —     3 SP
         Lantern, Hanging      1     14 SP       Saw, Hand                1     1 SP
         Listening Cone        —     8 CP        Scatter Sticks           —     2 CP
         Lock Picks            —     75 SP       Scourge                  —     2 SP
         Magnifying Lens       —     10 SP       Scrollcase               —     5 CP
         Marbles               —     1 SP        Scrollcase, Watertight   —     3 SP
         Milling Stones        2     8 SP        Scythe                   2     30 SP
         Mining Pick           1     35 SP       Sea Chest                4     25 SP
         Musical Instrument    2     70 SP       Sea Salt                 1     1 SP
         Net, Fishing          4     10 SP       Sighting Lens            1     80 SP
         Net, Handled          1     10 SP       Skates                   1     15 SP
         Noble Seal            —     100 SP      Skis                     3     20 SP
         Oar, Collapsible      2     5 SP        Sleeping Draft           1     10 SP
         Offering Bowl         1     5 SP        Slingbag                 1     5 CP
         Oil, Flask            1     1 SP        Snow Guards              —     7 SP
         Oil, Jellied          2     10 SP       Snow Shoes               1     5 SP
         Oil, Weapon           1     2 SP        Sounding Drum            1     15 SP
         Papyrus, Sheet        —     5 CP        Spade                    1     25 SP
         Parasol               1     60 SP       Spices                   —     5 SP
         Pendulum              2     45 SP       Stocks                   5     20 SP
         Pepper                —     5 SP        Tent, 4 person           2     10 SP
         Poison Antidote       1     100 SP      Tent, 8 person           5     50 SP
         Pole, 3m              1     1 SP        Thurible                 1     100 SP
         Pottery Wheel         25    25 SP       Torch, 1 hour            —     4 CP
         Preservative Fluid    1     30 SP       Torch, 6 hour            1     8 CP
         Preserving Kit        2     10 SP       Torch, Waterproof        —     2 SP
         Quenching Blanket     5     6 SP        Travois                  3     5 SP
         Quick Sheath          1     20 SP       Tree Net                 1     12 SP
         Quick Sheath, Wrist   —     15 SP       Underwater Goggles       —     15 SP
         Quiver                —     2 SP        Walking Stick            1     5 SP
         Rangeglass            1     300 SP      Water Additive           1     3 SP
         Razor, Folding        —     3 SP        Water Pack               6     10 SP
         Relic Case            2     50 SP       Water Trap               4     40 SP
         Relic, False          1     5 SP        Waterskin                1     5 CP
         Relic, True           1     10,000 SP   Wax, Block               1     2 CP
         Retracing Tool        —     2 SP        Weatherproofing Kit      1     10 SP
         Reversable Clothes                      Wine, Ritual             1     15 SP
         Ring, Bladed          —     15 SP       Writing Kit              1     45 SP
         Rope, 10m             2     10 SP       Yarn, 50m                1     7 CP
         Rope, Silken          1     75 SP




                                                                                         29
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                  2
       Riding and Animal Supplies
       Properly outfitting a mount or beast of burden is as important as equipping one’s
       self. Without the appropriate equipment, managing any form of animal becomes
       burdensome. Animals may not respond or respond poorly; and their endurance may be
       compromised if they are not properly shod, bedded-down and so on.

       The Riding and Animal Supplies table below shows a number of items and supplies
       that Adventurers could find very useful when dealing with animals (like those found
       in the Beasts and Cohorts chapter of this book), how much they weigh in ENC and
       their general market cost.

       Barding: This is a category of any type of armour that has been forged or made
       specifically for a mount of some kind. From plate leggings on a knightly stallion to
       the spiked leather found on a gladiator’s tiger, barding can be created in all of the
       same ways as armour for a regular humanoid. In order to create barding, the buyer
       must multiply the cost of the armour segment by two for leg locations, three for the
       head section, and five for any sort of body coverings. Tails and wings are equivalent to
       leg sections and multiplied by two. If wings have barding they are useless for flying.
       The ENC of the barding will be roughly equal to 2.5 times the current ENC of an
       equivalent standard armour segment depending on the size of the animal, and will
       follow all of the same rules for the material it is made of (see the Armour chapter of
       this book for types of armour).

       Riding and Animal Supplies                     Bit and Bridle: This is a short piece
       Item                ENC      Cost              of leather or metal that is placed in
                                                      the mouth of a mount and attached to
       Barding             Varies   See Description
                                                      a set of leather or chain reins to allow
       Bit and Bridle      1        15 SP
                                                      the rider or driver to steer the beast.
       Blanket and Hood    2        15 SP
                                                      Although it does not offer any sort of
       Cage, 2m x 2m       10       100 SP            bonus to Riding or Driving tests, not
       Crop                —        15 SP             having a bit and bridle on a mount when
       Driver’s Whip       —        25 SP             an Adventurer Critically Fumbles one
       Falconer’s Kit      1        30 SP             of the above tests can be catastrophic (at
       Feed/Mount Rations 1         5 CP              the Games Master’s discretion).
       (Per Day)
       Goad                1        25 SP             Blanket and Hood, Horse: Essential
       Leash and Muzzle    —        15 SP             when travelling to colder climes, the
       Resting Mood        —        8 SP              fur-lined horse hood and blanket will
       Saddle, Flight      3        100 SP            keep a mount warm and free of ice
       Saddle, Pack        5        65 SP             during cold nights in camp. A mount
       Saddle, Riding      3        60 SP
                                                      wearing a blanket and hood receives a
                                                      +20% bonus to all Resilience Skill Tests
       Saddle, War         4        90 SP
                                                      caused by cold weather.
       Saddlebag           2        20 SP
       Shoes, Horse        1        10 SP             Cage, 2m x 2m: Useful for holding
       Shoes, War          2        14 SP             unruly animals that are either untrained
       Tarp, Wintered      3        6 SP              or just too savage to be left to their own

 30
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                       2
         devices, cages can be of many sizes but 2m x 2m seems to be the most useful for most great
         cats, dogs and other animals. With the proper locking mechanism and a good night time
         covering to help the animal stay calm, a cage can be a perfect home for a dangerous beast.

         Crop: The crop is a piece of wood, bone or metal with a folded leather strap at the
         end. It is used to force a mount to push harder. Spurring movement with the stinging
         and noisy ‘pop’ of a crop on the hindquarters of a ridden mount can sometimes bring
         higher speeds. In game terms this allows a rider to make an additional Riding Skill
         Test to increase speed, though he can only do so three turns in a row before the mount
         becomes numb and no longer cares – or worse, gets angry at the sensation! Anyone
         struck repeatedly with a riding crop on bare flesh will eventually suffer a level of Fatigue
         (typically after four to five minutes of constant abuse).

         Driver’s Whip: A length of thin and flexible wood tipped with a long, thin piece of
         resin-coated cord or braided leather, a driver’s whip is used to sting the flanks of drawing
         mounts from the driver’s bench of a wagon, coach or cart. Similar to how a riding crop
         affects a ridden mount, the stinging ‘crack’ of a driver’s whip on the hindquarters or backs
         of drawing mounts can bring higher speeds out of the entire team. In game terms this
         allows a driver to make an additional Driving Skill Test to increase speed, but he can only
         do so a number of turns in a row equal to the number of drawing mounts attached to the
         vehicle before the team no longer responds.

         Falconer’s Kit: This kit includes a thick leather glove or gauntlet with cord sewn to it
         in order to tether a falcon or hunting hawk when at rest. It also includes a leather or
         wooden hood that fits over the eyes and ears of the bird in an effort to keep the animal
         calm before releasing it to perform its duties. Anyone attempting to perform Craft
         (Falconry) Skill Tests without a full falconer’s kit suffers a –5% penalty to his Skill Test.

         Feed/Mount Rations: Whether it is a supply of corn mash and oats for a stallion,
         sardines for a sea lion or osprey, or chunks of raw horsemeat for a griffon, this category
         covers the road rations needed to keep a mount healthy and strong. If they do not pack
         additional feed, Adventurers will need to make additional Survival or Tracking rolls
         every week in order to keep their mounts from becoming sickly or unruly.

         Goad: A thick-hafted piece of ivory, bone or wood tipped with a rounded hook
         and jabbing pinion, a goad is like a riding crop for thicker-skinned beasts. Reptiles,
         pachyderms, rhinos and the like will ignore the barely-felt slap of a crop, but will notice
         the irritating jab or tug of a goad. Users of a goad must be careful not to use it too
         often or too forcefully, as most of the thicker-skinned mounts can quite easily become
         dangerously hostile at a moment’s notice. All of the normal rules for a crop apply to a
         goad, except that a goad can be wielded in combat in the same way as a gaff (see page
         62) but with a –10% penalty to hit.

         Leash and Muzzle: Some animals, like dogs and great cats, are not able to use a bit and
         bridle. These animals have tearing teeth that are not safe to have exposed and free to
         bite handlers or passers by. The leash and muzzle is a set of external leather straps that

                                                                                                         31
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                  2
       keeps the animal from using its bite attack effectively. Otherwise, the leash and muzzle
       acts exactly as a bit and bridle for these animals.

       Resting Hood: Most animals are instinctively calmer and more accepting of outside
       stimuli when they cannot see it clearly. Placing a dark leather hood over the eyes and
       ears of the animal does not necessarily make it easier to train but does make it far less
       likely to get stressed or attack randomly. In game terms this is translated to the ability
       to re-roll one failed Lore (Animal) test per day (per animal) when trying to calm or
       move an animal wearing a resting hood. Fumbles may not be re-rolled.

       Saddle, Flight: A specialised saddle designed for beasts with wings like griffons and sky
       bulls, this is a must for aerial cavalry. The flight saddle has additional thigh stirrups that
       keep a rider leaning forward and tethered to the animal as it wings its way through the
       air. This can be a slight problem at times though, as the straps are decidedly difficult to
       unlatch when in motion – requiring a Mechanisms roll at +10% to do so in combat.

       Saddle, Pack: This is basically a riding saddle with two sets of attached saddlebags
       and an additional wooden cage for goods where a rider would normally sit. A normal
       set of saddlebags can hold up to 30 ENC of gear. The pack saddle increases this to an
       impressive 40 ENC – but leaves no room for a rider at all.

       Saddle, Riding: This is the most common form of leather saddle, and is the style
       that most riders prefer for long trips. Even though it does not offer any sort of bonus
       to Riding Skill Tests, riding a horse at anything faster than a brisk walk without one
       imposes a –10% penalty to Riding.

       Saddle, War: The heaviest of saddles, a war saddle has a raised front horn that has been
       riveted to protect the rider, a padded back portion that rises up a full hand’s span from a
       common saddle in order to support an armoured rider and several additional buckles to
       attach to barding. It is not the most comfortable of rides, as it inflicts one level of Fatigue
       per full eight hours of use, but it does add +10% to any Riding Skill Tests made during
       combat or to any test for the rider to stay in the saddle after a particularly forceful hit or
       attack.

       Saddlebag: This is a category of canvas, leather or cloth bags designed to be draped
       over the shoulders or flanks of a mount in order for it to carry more equipment or
       goods for the owner. Each saddlebag can carry 15 ENC worth of weight and is often
       sewn in pairs of two for evenness on the back of a mount.

       Shoes, Horse: Common metal shoes nailed to the bottom of hoofed animals,
       ‘horseshoes’ are designed to keep sharp stones and gravel from chipping or getting
       impacted in the comparatively soft hoof. Although not the most comfortable of
       augmentations to a mount, they are far better than ever having to deal with a split
       or cracked hoof. Hoofed mounts that do not have shoes will need to be rested more
       frequently in order to remove detritus, imposing a –10% penalty to travel times
       through any type of rocky or stony terrain.


 32
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                             2
         Shoes, War: These are specially crafted combat shoes made for hoofed mounts. Not
         only do they have all of the same benefits of common horseshoes, but are forged with
         raised studs on the underside and two prongs that curve upward to give the animal a
         much deadlier kick. Any hoofed animal wearing war shoes inflicts an additional 1D4
         damage with a kick or trample attack, but suffers a –20% penalty to travel times due
         to cumbersome footwear.

         Tarp, Wintered: Mounts and animal companions are sometimes taken for granted,
         especially in the winter months. Many breeds can suffer negative effects from the cold,
         snow and ice just as the Adventurers can. Thoughtful or prepared animal handlers can
         use these thick leather tarps to keep the cold weather from harming their animals. Any
         animal wearing a wintered tarp can add +10% to its Survival or Resilience Skill Tests
         to avoid the effects of natural cold but suffer a –1m to every Movement action due to
         its bulk and restrictiveness.


         Clothing
         This section is a collection of outfits and special clothing that are available from place
         -to-place. Unlike common goods, many of these items are very self-explanatory.


         Clothing Descriptions
         Aba: These desert robes are made of a light fabric, covering the whole body and
         typically brown or white in colour. A humanoid will usually wear several layers of these
         fabrics, with light colours worn under dark colours. In hot or dry climates, an Aba helps
         prevent perspiration, allowing to wearer to retain water. In hot, dry conditions the
         wearer gains a +10% bonus to his Survival skill. In environments with high humidity
         there is no benefit from wearing Aba. An Adventurer must be shown how to wear Aba
         properly. If the Adventurer does not have a guide, he must succeed Survival Test when
         he first tries to wear an Aba.

         Apron, Industrial: This is a heavy leather apron worn by smiths, glass blowers and
         other professionals who must withstand direct and oppressive heat. Its special design
         makes it heavy (2 ENC) but it can shield the wearer’s chest, abdomen and upper legs
         from up to 10 points of heat-based damage per minute. It is awkward to move around
         in, and imposes a –10% Evade penalty because of its stiffness.

         Bandolier: A leather belt worn from one shoulder to the opposite hip, a bandolier
         allows an Adventurer to keep several small items at hand by tucking them in the half
         dozen or so loops it is sewn with. Often used to carry tools or small weapons, the
         bandolier can also be adjusted to hold two larger-sized weapons (such as a sword or an
         axe) in the back as well as small items in the front.

         Belt Buckle, Thieves’: This is a large ornamental belt buckle that can be slid to one
         side with a successful Sleight Skill Test, revealing a small compartment large enough to
         carry a set of lock picks, a handful of coins or a few gemstones. It is commonly used by
         thieves as the –50% penalty to Perception it imposes on anyone searching the wearer
         makes it perfect for hiding small objects.
                                                                                                      33
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                               2
       Boots, Bladed: These stout boots are designed specifically to aid climbers of trees
       and soft rock. With toughened soles holding an upturned blade secure, a climber can
       scale sheer surfaces easily with very little practice. The upturned blades ensure that
       movement is not impeded though the heavy construction of this footwear makes the
       wearer very easy to track. Bladed boots give the wearer a +10% bonus to their Climb
       skill when scaling trees or other softer surfaces. However, a +20% bonus is granted to
       any Track Test made to follow the wearer.

       Boots, Thieves’: Although they look like a common pair of comfortable boots, thieves’
       boots have a hollow heel and a number of hidden pockets along the underside of the
       cuff. With access to the secret compartments, the wearer (or anyone who can make a
       Perception test at –50%) can find/hide up to 20 coins, five gemstones and a small knife
       or similar objects in each boot.

       Catsuit, Intruder’s: Made from suede, stitched with silk and dyed the darkest black
       with grey undertones, the intruder’s catsuit is a hooded full body suit that must be
       fitted to the wearer by a tailor using the Craft (Tailor) skill at –10%. Once fitted the
       suit is lightweight and durable, but also padded and smoothed at all the right points in
       order to be remarkably silent. Anyone wearing a fitted catsuit is granted a +10% to his
       Stealth skill, +25% if used at night or in darkness.

       Coat, Winter: This woolly coat lined with rabbit or beaver fur is thick and warm,
       repelling the stiff and bitter winds of the high mountains or cold winters. Anyone
       wearing a winter coat can add +10% to his Survival or Resilience Skill Tests to avoid
       the effects of natural cold.

       Cloak, Winter: A large fur and leather cloak with an extra flap to close around the
       body completely, a winter cloak is too heavy and thick to wear all the time but does a
       great deal to ward off the wind and snow in such conditions. Anyone wearing a winter
       cloak can add +10% to his Survival or Resilience Skill Tests to avoid the effects of
       natural cold. A winter cloak may also be used as a warm blanket/bedroll combination.

       Collar, Ornamental: This item represents a wide variety of ornamental collars that can
       alter an observer’s view of the wearer. From the leather and spikes of a gladiator, to the



        But It’s Only a Bit of Platemail…
        Whilst many Adventurers will spend a great deal of time clad in armour, anything other
        than leather becomes uncomfortable due to its heat, weight, liability to chaff, and so
        on. Furthermore, it is simply not acceptable to wander around a town or city dressed
        in armour. It may not be illegal, necessarily, but unless a settlement is in a time of war
        it is simply not the done thing. Anyone who insists on wearing armour in a civilised
        settlement outside a time of conflict suffers a penalty to his Influence roll equal to twice
        the armour’s Armour Penalty. Only leather armour is exempt from this rule.



 34
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                           2
         high-velvet of a noble, to the pearls and beads of a harlot – there are several versions of
         collars. Each one offers a +5% bonus to the Influence skill when used in a way befitting
         the type of collar (Games Master’s discretion).

         Corset: Made from a variety of materials stretched over thin whale bones and laced
         impossibly tight to squeeze a female (and sometimes a male) into an extremely
         enticing shape, the corset is often worn under a dress or fanciful costume in order
         to give the person that extra edge in social circles. A lady wearing a corset can be
         considered to have a +5% to her Influence skill when dealing with targets that could
         be theoretically seduced by her attractive shape. However, any activity other than
         regular paced walking or slow dancing requires a Resilience test or a level of Fatigue
         is taken by the wearer as the corset robs much mobility and breathing room.

         Gauntlets, Clawed: These armoured gloves end in long, sharpened spikes designed
         to aid in climbing. When used in conjunction with an Athletics (climb) Skill Test
         the gauntlets grant a +5% bonus. In addition, most rogues sharpen the spikes’ edges,
         making them effective weapons, giving a +1 bonus to any damage from a punch.

         Gloves, Fire: Many alchemists find that they need to handle very hot objects for
         extended periods of time. These gloves were made to meet that need. They have heavy
         hide on the palm surface, backed by non-conductive fibres from a particular kind
         of stone and a thin metal mesh. The innermost layer is typically heavy cloth. The
         wearer of the gloves has a –10% penalty to any Skill Test requiring fine manipulation
         of objects. The gloves absorb five points of heat damage to the arms every round.

         Gloves, Industrial: These are heavy leather gloves worn by blacksmiths, armourers
         and other professionals who must withstand direct and oppressive heat. Their special
         design makes them rather heavy for gloves (1 ENC) but do well to shield the wearer’s
         hands and forearms from up to 10 points of heat-based damage per minute. They are
         rather stiff and unyielding, imposing a –10% penalty to any skills requiring manual
         dexterity – including combat.

         Gloves, Thieves’: These fingerless suede gloves are lightweight and lashed to the wearer’s
         wrists tightly. With a flip of the thumb, a small flap on the palm of the glove can be
         opened briefly to slide something (like a coin or ring) into the glove before closing once
         more with a roll of the little finger. This offers the wearer a +5% bonus to Sleight, which
         can only be performed once per hand before to the object must be removed.

         Hat, Cowled: Used by assassins and bandits, but also by vigilantes and anonymous
         heroes, the cowled hat – or just cowl – is a rolled piece of suede cut with eyeholes and
         breathing vents attached to a wide-brimmed hat. With just a quick flip the suede rolls
         down from beneath the brim to become a mask that can be laced or buckled quickly
         at the back of the head. The cowl hides all facial features other than eye colour and can
         be decorated to look however the wearer wishes it to. The lack of facial features and
         hidden hair and skin grants a +10% bonus to Disguise rolls to hide the wearer’s true
         persona.


                                                                                                       35
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                2
       Hat, Winter: This is a heavy woollen cap with flaps of rabbit fur or lambs’ fleece that
       can be tied down over the sides of the face and ears. Some winter hats even have a
       flap that might cover the face as well. Anyone wearing a winter hat can add +5% to
       his Survival and Resilience Skill Tests to withstand mundane cold and related weather
       effects.

       Headdress: This catch all item covers all manner of ritual head gear, from antlered
       crowns to swan feather veils. Headdresses often symbolise the wearer becoming the
       creature depicted by the item.

       Mask: A simple device and yet one a shocking number of novice thieves always seem
       to forget. Though many are highly elaborate, a mask need be nothing more expensive
       than solid black leather obscuring the wearer’s face. Any Adventurer wearing a mask
       will be unidentifiable if he encounters others he has never met (though he should
       also take care to wear nondescript clothing and wield common weapons). If he does
       encounter someone he knows, the mask grants a +10% bonus to his Disguise Skill Test.

       Reversible Clothes: Usually made as a shirt and pants suit or a dress, reversible clothes
       can be pulled off extremely quickly, turned inside out, and put back on with little effort.
       With practice, a set of reversible clothes can be inverted and worn within the space of
       six seconds. Both sides of reversible clothing are patterned differently and appear to
       be of wildly disparate styles. Performs use them for quick costume changes, while folk
       in less honest lines of work can use them as nearly instantaneous disguise attempts.
       Games Master may allow a wearer who uses reversible clothes from concealment to
       evade pursuers depending on the circumstances.

       Robe, Religious: This is another category of clothing that varies greatly from religion
       -to-religion. A dark faith of death-worship might have long black and purple robes of
       silk and taffeta, where a faith of dawn and sunshine might have bright yellow and white
       linens. A robe marks the wearer as a member of that faith’s clergy, and may require
       onlookers to make specific Lore Skill Tests to figure out which faith that might be.
       Such robes give the wearer a +10% bonus to his Influence skill when dealing with any
       member of the faith represented by the robes.

       Tabard, Hearldic: Similar in make to a common tabard, but normally constructed
       of better quality linens and dyes, the heraldic tabard bears a colourful and easily
       recognisable insignia or crest of a guild, noble house or similar group. Wearing
       a heraldic tabard automatically brings assumptions that the wearer is a member or
       employee of the group depicted. Depending on those he is dealing with, the Games
       Master should assign up to +/–25% to any Influence Skill Tests he has to make. After
       all, wearing the king’s colours and crest can have a much different effect on loyal serfs
       then it does on cutthroat highwaymen!

       Umbrella Hat: This massive, slightly conical, reed hat reaches just past your shoulders.
       Although somewhat clumsy they do a fine job of keeping the rain off of an Adventurer’s
       head.


 36
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                         2
         Vest, Assassin’s: A tight-fitting suede vest designed to fit to the wearer under a loose shirt
         or coat, the assassin’s vest is so-named due to the nature of its most common users. The
         vest has five loops along the ribs for knives, holding such weapons tightly so as to keep
         them from notice. It has three small padded pockets that can carry vials of poison or other
         chemicals safely and a space under the hem where a clever killer could place a garrotte. All
         of these items should have a +15% Sleight skill bonus to avoid being noticed at a glance,
         and can be reached by either hand as a standard Combat Action.

         Clothing
         Article of Clothing           Cost                Article of Clothing          Cost
         Aba                           6 SP                Gloves, Fire                 30 SP
         Apron, Industrial             4 SP                Gloves, Fancy                2 SP
         Baldric                       2 SP                Gloves, Industrial           4 SP
         Bandolier                     8 CP                Gloves, Thieves’             5 SP
         Belt, Leather                 6 CP                Hat, Brimmed                 8 CP
         Belt, Fancy                   2 SP                Hat, Cowled                  1 SP
         Belt buckle, Thieves’         10 SP               Hat, Winter                  4 SP
         Boots, Bladed                 20 SP               Headdress                    20 SP
         Boots, Common                 6 SP                Loincloth                    1 CP
         Boots, High                   8 SP                Mask                         5 CP
         Boots, Riding                 10 SP               Reversable Clothes           30 SP
         Boots, Thieves’               25 SP               Robe, Woollen                2 SP
         Breeches, Common              1 SP                Robe, Religious              25 SP
         Breeches, Fancy               3 SP                Sash, Common                 3 CP
         Bustle                        2 SP                Sash, Fancy                  2 SP
         Catsuit, Intruder’s           35 SP               Shirt, Common                2 CP
         Cape                          3 SP                Shirt, Fancy                 2 SP
         Coat, Common                  2 SP                Shirt, Noble                 75 SP
         Coat, Fancy                   8 SP                Shoes, Common                2 SP
         Coat, Winter                  10 SP               Shoes, Fancy                 6 SP
         Cloak, Common                 2 SP                Shoes, Sandals               1 SP
         Cloak, Winter                 12 SP               Shoes, Tabi                  10 SP
         Collar, Ornamental            5 SP                Skirt, Leather               5 SP
         Corset                        4 SP                Tabard, Common               7 CP
         Doublet, Common               8 CP                Tabard, Heralded             10 SP
         Doublet, Fancy                2 SP                Toga, Common                 5 CP
         Dress, Common                 2 SP                Toga, Fancy                  2 SP
         Dress, Fancy                  5 SP                Toga, Noble                  100 SP
         Dress, Noble                  150 SP              Tunic, Common                6 CP
         Gauntlets, Clawed             8 SP                Tunic, Fancy                 2 SP
         Gloves, Common                5 CP                Umbrella Hat                 2 SP
                                                           Vest, Assassin’s             25 SP




                                                                                                          37
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                   2
          TRADING & QUALITY
       This chapter concerns the trading of items and their differing quality of
       production.

       The availability and price of goods is affected by the type of settlement where it is
       bought. Legend categorises settlements into the categories shown.


       Hamlet
       A hamlet is a tiny village, usually with between one and five extended families living in
       the area. The vast majority of the hamlet’s people are involved in whatever the primary
       industry of the area may be – farming in grasslands, fishing on a waterway, logging
       or hunting in a forest. Unless the hamlet is in a civilised culture the primary unit of
       exchange is bartering, although such people often have a few coins’ worth of actual
       money as well.

       The average hamlet has a number of people with auxiliary skills. For instance, although
       all adults may be farmers, one or two may also have skill as thatchers or carpenters,
       trading their knowledge and labour in return for additional food or other goods. It is
       unlikely a hamlet will have even so much as a maintained shrine inside it. Citizens of a
       hamlet must rely on itinerant peddlers for any goods they cannot produce themselves.
       Such peddlers commonly pass through once a month or so.


       Village
       Consisting of up to 200 people, a village generally (but not always) has a selection of
       basic amenities: a tavern or an inn; a smithy; and perhaps a store of some kind selling
       the most basic of goods – usually locally sourced produce. A village usually has a shrine


      Settlement Type          Cultures                         Population          Price Factor
      Hamlet                   All                              10 – 30             2
      Village                  All                              30 – 200            1.5
      Small Town               Barbarian, Nomad, Civilised      200 – 500           1.25
      Medium Town              Barbarian, Nomad, Civilised      500 – 1,000         1.25
      Large Town               Civilised                        1,000 – 3,000       1
      Small City               Civilised                        3,000 – 5,000       1
      Medium City              Civilised                        5,000 – 10,000      1.25
      Large City               Civilised                        10,000 – 20,000     1.5
      Capital/Metropolis       Civilised                        20,000+             2


 38
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                       2
         to the local god or gods. In barbarian cultures a village may be known as a stead and
         consist of a clan of families belonging to a larger tribe.

         Like the hamlet, a village has people with auxiliary skills, although the form of trade is
         still likely to be barter unless it is in a civilised culture.

         Small Town
         With up to 500 souls the majority of the people in a small town will be involved in
         whatever the primary industry of the area is, but they will also have some citizens
         specialised in other trades. A small town will almost always have at least one dedicated
         thatcher, tool smith or farrier, carpenter, potter and weaver. Towns are the smallest
         form of civilisation where one is likely to find community-oriented businesses, such
         as taverns or inns. Additionally, it is the smallest form of civilisation to boast a regular
         marketplace, a permanent site where people from the area come together to buy and
         sell goods, most often on a weekly basis. Travelling traders will organise their schedules
         to arrive in towns on trading day.

         Most villages include a resident priest who serves as spiritual caretaker for the people
         and administer of a local shrine. Commonly, this priest would only qualify as an initiate
         in a larger city but it is not impossible to find a village shrine administered by a retired
         acolyte who attained great status in his youth.

         Small towns usually exist on an economy that is equal parts barter-based and
         monetary.


         Medium Town
         Having up to 1,000 people a medium town’s residents are generally involved in a single
         local industry, although there will be many others who pursue different occupations. A
         medium town commonly has at least one smith, several carpenters, thatchers, weavers
         and so forth. A medium town always has at least a shrine in it as a place of worship and
         may even have a larger religious centre, depending on the local culture.

         A medium town is likely to have a reasonable sized market, held regularly, where
         traders, farmers and others from outlying areas come to sell their produce. Markets
         may be seasonal affairs, less regular in winter months.


         Large Town/Small City
         With up to 5,000 residents, a large town or small city has often grown too large for
         its immediately available food sources, which means food must be imported from
         outlying areas.

         Expect this level of settlement to have one or more permanent marketplaces that do a
         daily business, as well as a number of individual shops where particular goods can be
         bought and sold. At this size of settlement, monetary exchange has all but completely
         replaced the barter system. A small city is very likely to be engaged in an active trading

                                                                                                        39
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                 2
       enterprise, particularly if it lies on a sea coast or major river. Such a city will have
       warehouses and other facilities for storing and shipping goods. If it lies on a waterway,
       there will be a significant dock system in place.

       A small city is likely to have one or two major temples, as well as a number of other
       shrines. It is not uncommon for one or more sorcerers to make their homes in small
       cities, particularly those lying along important trade routes.

       A small city is often built around the home and holdings of a major noble such as a count
       or duke, who acts as head of a bureaucratic government. This is the largest settlement type
       of barbarian cultures.


       Medium City
       A medium city boasts a population of up to 10,000, and is likely to have a controlling
       nobility and be the domain or province of a powerful noble such as a duke or earl.

       Cities of this size and larger require good transportation systems (usually by water)
       as their lifeblood is almost always trade. Such a large number of people cannot feed
       themselves through local resources and importing food is sure to be a lucrative industry.
       A medium city will have a number of permanent marketplaces scattered throughout it,
       possibly even specialised marketplaces for particular types of goods.

       In addition to craftsmen practising all the basic trades, such as carpentry and
       blacksmithing, a medium city will almost certainly be a centre of manufacture or trade
       with a certain number of luxury items rarely available elsewhere, such as large musical
       instruments, works of art and fabulously expensive pieces of armour.

       A medium city will have at least one great temple or church, manned by a permanent
       clergy. Sorcerers may also make their homes in large cities too, relying upon the constant
       stream of trade to bring them knowledge and materials they need.


       Large City
       With a population of up to 20,000 a large city boasts all the amenities of a medium
       city and will be founded on the rulership of a duke, at the very least. Several temples
       to the local gods are found along with smaller temples and shrines to lesser and even
       foreign gods, all with attendant clergy. Large cities tend to be centres of strategic
       importance: a barracks and permanent military presence is not uncommon. The city
       is also likely to be walled with a certain degree of security monitoring who enters and
       leaves. Large cities require a bureaucracy to maintain the place, which reports to the
       ruling noble. Guilds and other trade factions are highly likely, as are distinct political
       sects with an interest in controlling the power base.


       Capital/Metropolis
       With populations in the tens of thousands a capital or metropolis has the widest
       array of goods and services available. Most items can be found here, but prices are
       not guaranteed to be low, despite the availability. Guilds may control pricing and aim
 40
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                         2
         to protect their members’ livelihoods but with a certain balance to ensure a market
         still thrives.

         The main characteristic of a settlement of this size is that it controls a sizeable region
         politically and militarily. It is likely the seat of the ruler and will have competing political
         and religious interests. The temples will be the grandest and largest as a testament to
         both wealth and power. A capital or metropolis is almost certainly walled or defended
         to heavy degree as it represents a significant strategic target. Prices in the city reflect
         the expensive upkeep needed plus the requirements of a large, permanent bureaucracy.


         Price, Profit and Trade
         Generally speaking, an item is worth more in an area to which it must be imported.
         In Arms of Legend the price for all equipment is the small city price. The Price Factor
         noted in the Settlement Table on page 38 is the multiplier applied to the standard price
         quoted for any piece of equipment or service detailed in this book. Of course, this level
         of inflation is not consistent and depends on availability of goods; some items may be
         cheaper in a large city than a smaller one, depending on resources, and therefore the
         Price Factor should be used as a guide by Games Masters rather than a hard and fast
         rule. For instance farm animals and the like are much less expensive in rural areas,
         where they are plentiful, than they are in a major city.


         Barter
         Expect coinage to be used in civilised cultures, but in barbarian, primitive and nomad
         cultures, barter – the cross-trading of goods, services and favours – is far more common.

         The success of bartering depends on tendering something the other party wants or
         needs in exchange for what is on offer. A civilised Adventurer in a barbarian stead may
         proffer coins in exchange for food, but coins do not necessarily offer any immediate
         advantage to the provider. Therefore to barter successfully, the Adventurer must have
         something tangible that he can offer that can be put to (relatively) immediate use.

         Like-for-like usually works well. An Adventurer who seeks some food and has some
         drink to offer in return is likely to be met favourably. Services may also suffice: offering
         to chop wood for a morning in exchange for a bowl of stew, for example. More complex
         or specialised goods are services are less likely to succeed - unless the Adventurer can
         convince the other party of the need and utility.

         To abstract the barter process use the following rules:

         •	   The Adventurer must make an offer of something: goods or service. If this is a
              common commodity or an essential service that is obviously going to be of benefit,
              then the barter succeeds.
         •	   If the Adventurer is intending to offer something less common, of less obvious
              value or something esoteric, then he may make an Evaluate roll. If successful, he
              has spotted a way of selling-in what he offers that is not obvious to the other party.
              This grants a bonus to the following roll: either Influence or Commerce.
                                                                                                            41
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                     2
       Bartering Evaluate
       Evaluate Level of Success         Influence Bonus          Commerce Bonus
       Critical                          +20%                     +40%
       Success                           +10%                     +20%
       Failure                           0                        0
       Fumble                            –20%                     –10%

       •	   Next the Adventurer makes either an Opposed Influence or Commerce roll,
            whichever is higher. The other party resists with either his Persistence or Commerce,
            again, whichever is higher.
       •	   If the Adventurer wins the Opposed roll, what he offers is accepted. If he fails, it
            is not. If the Adventurer fumbles the opposed roll, then there is a good chance he
            has insulted the other party, meaning that relations between them will be soured:
            precisely how depends on the circumstances.


       Haggling
       Haggling is the art of reducing the asking price to a more agreeable amount. A skilled
       negotiator can achieve substantial discounts through careful haggling.

       The process works in the same way as for Bartering: an Evaluate roll followed by an
       Opposed Influence/Commerce roll against Persistence/Commerce. The outcome of
       the roll determines what the Adventurer, whether buying or selling, achieves:

       Haggling Outcome
       Haggling Level of Success         Negotiated Price
       Critical                          Half of the original price
       Success                           Three quarters of the original price
       Failure                           No reduction in price
       Fumble                            No Trade


       Making, Repairing, Maintenance and Quality
       Items available on the standard Legend equipment lists are assumed to be of average
       quality – they get the job done but are not anything special. Whether a sword was
       crafted by a smith with a Craft skill of 50% or 300% makes little difference in this
       case. As long as the blade is long, solid and sharp, the sword functions as it is supposed
       to, it is considered to be of standard quality. The sword made by the better smith may
       have a bit more intricacy in the hilt, may hold an edge a little better or possess a more
       comfortable grip, but in game terms the blade is effectively identical to that made by
       the lesser smith.




 42
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                        2
         Making, maintaining or repairing anything properly requires certain essentials:

         •	   The skills to do the job – typically a Craft skill, Engineering or Mechanisms.
         •	   Tools and Resources – including labour (skilled and unskilled), workshops, and so forth.
         •	   Time.

         Skills
         The following Advanced Skills are used in building, repairing and maintaining.

         Craft – to manufacture, maintain and repair items that typically have no or few moving
         parts: armour, clothing, pottery, weapons and so forth.

         Engineering – to manufacture, maintain and repair large structures and, (typically)
         machinery with several moving parts.

         Mechanisms – to manufacture, maintain and repair small items with several moving parts.

         Some overlap naturally occurs between these skills: one could use Craft (Clockmaking)
         or Mechanisms to make and repair a pocket watch or clock; similarly, one could
         employ Engineering or Mechanisms to build a siege catapult. In most cases the most
         appropriate skill to use is obvious but where it is case of either/or, then Adventurers can
         use whichever skill is highest. Games Masters may apply a modifier of between –10%
         and –60% depending on how appropriate the skill is to the task at hand.

         Item Quality
          Total Score Result
          175 - 200   A perfect, masterly job. The item benefits from 3 Enhancements (see
                      Enhancements).
          150         A superb job. The item benefits from 2 Enhancements (see
                      Enhancements).
          125         An excellent job. The item benefits from 1 Enhancements (see
                      Enhancements).
          100         A perfectly serviceable, acceptable product or job, that does what it is
                      intended to do.
          75          A reasonable, but flawed result. The item will break or wear out 25%
                      quicker than normal or its Hit Points and value are reduced by one
                      quarter reflecting its flawed durability.
          50          A poor, flawed result. The item will break or wear out 50% quicker
                      than normal or its Hit Points and value are reduced by one half
                      reflecting its flawed durability.
          25          A shoddy, botched piece of work. The item will break or wear out
                      75% quicker than normal or its Hit Points and value are reduced by
                      three quarters reflecting its shoddy durability.
          0 or less   The project is simply not finished and is unusable.


                                                                                                         43
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                  2
       Tools and Resources
       One cannot build a solid bridge if no wood, metal or stone is available. A blacksmith
       cannot fashion a horseshoe without iron, an anvil, a forge and so on. The availability
       of tools and other resources (such as water, skilled or unskilled labour and so forth)
       determines a number of things:

       •	   Whether the task as at hand is possible or not.
       •	   How long the task takes to complete.
       •	   The quality of the finished work.

       Each of these must be weighed against the circumstances. For example, if a blacksmith
       has iron, tools, forge and anvil, he can certainly make that horseshoe. However, if the
       tools he works with are of poor quality, then making a horseshoe might take longer
       and be of a lower quality than if he had the best tools to work with. Similarly, if the
       blacksmith has everything he needs and of good quality, an impatient noble wanting
       the job done in half the usual time means that the end quality might also be lacking.

       All these conditions can be considered to be cumulative. Thus, if the task at hand is
       clearly impossible in the first place (making a stone bridge where there is no available
       stone) then the task’s duration and the available tools are academic. If the blacksmith
       works with sub-standard implements and in a hurry, then the chance of a quality
       product is doubly compromised. How these elements come into effect is discussed in
       Tasks.


       Tasks
       Building or repairing something always takes time and this is measured in the Task
       Round. The length of a Task Round depends on the nature of the project and represents
       an amount of time, ranging from seconds through to years, necessary for completing
       a particular stage of a project. A range of sample tasks and Task Rounds is given in
       the table below. The table notes the activity, the most appropriate skill or skills for
       accomplishing it and the time unit for the Task Round.

        Task                       Appropriate Skill                     Task Round Unit
        Repairing torn clothing    Craft (Sewing)                        5minutes – 1 hour
        Forging a horseshoe        Craft (Blacksmith)                    5 minutes – 30
                                                                         minutes
        Making a sword             Craft (Sword or Weaponsmith)          1 days – 5 days
        Building a Wooden or       Engineering                           6 months – several
        stone Structure                                                  years
        Making a clock             Mechanisms                            1 month

       To complete a task, the person(s) involved makes a roll against the appropriate skill and
       notes the level of success. Each roll contributes a certain percentage to the overall result
       with the goal being to score 100% or higher.



 44
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                          2
         •	   Critical: 50%
         •	   Success: 25%
         •	   Failure : 0%
         •	   Fumble: –25%

         Rolls are made until either 100% (or more) is reached, or the available time or budget
         is exhausted.

         Each roll consumes one Task Round, and it is the case for most projects that a competent
         worker, not suffering any failures, will accomplish the task in four Task Rounds.

         Reaching 100% indicates that the end result of a good standard. Anything less is sub-
         standard. If time is not an issue, then the worker can keep going until 100% is reached.
         However, if time is of the essence, then each skill roll counts – and so will the quality
         of the resources to hand.

         The final percentage reflects the quality of the product or completed task.

         For example, the blacksmith is ordered to make a new shoe for the horse of an impatient
         nobleman. Ordinarily it would take the blacksmith 20 minutes to make a decent horseshoe
         (representing four successful skills rolls, with five minutes for each roll). However, the
         nobleman wants the job done in half the time. This means that the blacksmith has only two
         Task Rounds to make and fit the shoe. He can do it to 100% if he critically succeeds in both
         Task Rounds, but anything less results in an imperfect product.

         On his first Task Round roll, the blacksmith rolls 35 – a success, and contributing 25% to
         the result. On his second Task Round roll, he rolls 02 – a critical, and contributing 50%
         to the result. So, in the time allotted to him, he achieves a score of 75% for the task. The
         horseshoe is reasonable enough, but is unlikely to last the 350 kilometres a horseshoe normally
         lasts for. Instead it will last for 25% less than this, so is good for only 260 kilometres or so:
         either that, or the nobleman sees the flaws in the blacksmith’s work and only pays him three
         quarters of the usual fee.

         Circumstance Modifiers to Skills
         The following modifiers, depending on circumstances,

          Circumstance                             Modifier
          No tools                                 Task is impossible
          Improvised tools                         –40%
          Poor Quality/Incomplete Tools            –30%
          Lacking a crucial resource               –30%
          Lacking a major resource                 –20%
          Lacking a minor resource                 –10%
          Good Quality tools                       +20%


                                                                                                             45
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                      2
       Enhancements
       Creating something to 100% creates a solid, working, functional item that may be
       aesthetically pleasing on a basic level but is otherwise unremarkable. Creating things
       that are truly remarkable – masterpieces and works of art – requires both luck, skill and
       additional time.

       If a project exceeds 100% in four or less Task rounds, it benefits from the number of
       Enhancements noted in the Item Quality table. If a project reaches 100% in four or less
       Task rounds, the maker has the option to continue refining it. To do this he continues
       to work on it for a further Task Round and, depending on the result of the skill roll for
       the Task Round, may enhance it.

       Thus, a fumble actively overworks the item, taking away from its quality rather than
       enhancing it.

       •	   Critical Success: 2 Enhancements
       •	   Success: 1 Enhancement
       •	   Failure: No Enhancements
       •	   Fumble: Reduce Quality by –25%

       The Enhancement is determined by the make. Choose from the following:

       Enhancements
        Enhancement          Effect
        Highly Desirable     The item’s value is doubled.
        Highly Durable       The item’s Hit Points are increased by half again.
        Highly Resilient     The item’s Armour Points are increased by half again.
        Highly Efficient     The item of such quality that it confers a +5% bonus to the
                             skill required to use it.
        Highly Effective     If a weapon it gains +1 to its Damage rating. Other items
                             reduce ENC value by 1D2 points.

       Enhancements cannot stack: that is, different enhancements must always be chosen;
       one may not pick the same enhancement to achieve multiple benefits.

       For example, two weapon smiths are working on weapons for respective customers. Grunwold,
       through good fortune and excellent tools and raw materials achieves a score of 150% in four
       task rounds. Warleggan achieves 100% in the same time.

       Grunwold can automatically choose two enhancements. He decided to make the sword Highly
       Efficient and Highly Effective, giving it +5% to the Sword Combat Style and +1 Damage.
       However the sword does not look appreciably different to a standard sword. If he wants to
       charge more for it, then he must convince the client of its overall quality.




 46
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                         2
                   Warleggan creates a
                  standard, functional
                weapon but decides to
               attempt to work on the
              item a little further. He
                  scores a success in his
           additional Craft (Weapon
           Smith) roll and thus gains
                one enhancement. He
           decides to make the sword
         shiny and intricate, thereby
          doubling its value, but not
             enhancing its durability,
          efficiency or effectiveness in
                         any other way.

              Evaluating Quality
                Buyers of items use
               the Evaluate skill to
             identify any potential
                  enhancements. A
           craftsman might claim
           that a sword is sharper
           and more efficient but
             that does not make it
             so. Similarly, a flashy,
            jewel-encrusted sword
            may simply glitter but
           be no more effective in
              combat than its drab
                      counterparts.

                 Successful Evaluate
              rolls form the basis of
           bartering and haggling,
                as described earlier.
          However, an Adventurer
            that critically succeeds
             in his Evaluate sees all
            enhancements worked
         into an item. A successful
             roll identifies just one
            – which is determined
                          randomly.




                                            47
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                     2
                                                         ARMOUR
       Armour’s necessity should be obvious. A layer of protective material reduces damage
       sustained in combat, greatly improving the chances of survival. Even a single point
       of linen or leather, in a strategic area like the head or chest, can make the difference
       between a living Adventurer and a dead one.


       Armour Types
       Banded/Lamellar: Metal plates stitched to a leather backing and then overlapped to
       resemble the natural armour of an armadillo. Banded has a certain flexibility but is still
       heavy to wear.

       Bezainted: Soft leather with metal discs stitched to it (resembling the bezant, a medieval
       coin). It offers good protection but is nevertheless heavy to wear.

       Bone: Crafted from the bone of a dead creature (such as a skull helmet), bone armour
       is surprisingly durable and can take a significant amount of damage before yielding,
       especially when backed with thick fur or leather for comfort and protection. Many
       bone helms have skull-like faces or other horrifying visages, granting a +10% bonus
       to Influence tests made to intimidate but suffering a –10% penalty to Influence tests
       to persuade or charm those who might find the mask a bit imposing. A bone shirt or
       skirt - made from lengths of rib-bone sewn together with leather cord or small brass
       rings - is commonly seen in tribal societies or worn by those who want to give off an
       image of barbarism. The bone shirt also grants a +10% bonus to Influence tests made
       to intimidate but suffers a –10% penalty to Influence tests made to persuade or charm
       those who might think the bone armour is savage.

       Brigandine: Metal scales are sandwiched between layers of leather and held in place by
       rivets. Strong and durable its rivets offer a more attractive finish than straightforward
       metal armour.

       Chainmail: Woven metal links which, whilst heavy, are flexible and more durable than
       armour relying on a leather base.

       Enamelled: Cast from either leather or tin before being painted repeatedly with stiff
       resins and alchemical agents, enamelled armour is beautiful and resilient without being
       too heavy. Due to its construction, it is always made in brilliant colours that strike the
       eye from a great distance. Often used by generals, heroes and showmen, enamelled
       armour is among the most attractive armour made. Every individual piece of enamelled
       armour grants +10% to any Influence tests made toward onlookers, but also applies
       that same bonus to any Perception tests made to spot the wearer.
 48
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                        2
         Hard Leather: Strengthened hides and cured leather used for shields and body armour.
         Hard leather is the consistency of shoe leather: hard wearing yet flexible.

         Linen Cuirass: Similar to a heavy leather cuirass but the armour is crafted from
         multiple layers of quilted linen. The thick, stiff fabric provides decent protection at a
         fraction of the weight of other materials.

         Plate: Made of moulded individual metal plates, this armour provides excellent
         protection but is encumbering and comes with a heavy price tag.

         Ringmail: Bronze or iron rings sewn onto a leather backing. Heavier than leather, but
         affords much better protection.

         Scalemail: Similar to Ring, but the rings are replaced with scales of metal which
         overlap, like the scales of a fish or serpent.

         Soft Leather: Armour made from cured hides – the simplest form of armour usually
         found amongst primitive cultures but also worn in more cultivated styles where
         protection is important but not necessarily an essential.

         Wooden: This armour is carved from appropriately sized pieces of timber and generally
         lacquered to improve its durability. What wooden armour lacks in flexibility, it makes-
         up for in two other areas. First, attempting to Impale through wooden armour is
         difficult – the Impale Combat Manoeuvre can only be chosen on a Critical Success
         against an opponent clad in wood. The armour’s natural suppleness and ability to
         absorb stabs and jabs means that the impaling chance is reduced. The armour is also
         buoyant: someone falling into water wearing wooden armour will not sink, as they
         would if wearing metal. Wooden armour must be carved by a suitable craftsman to fit
         the wearer.

         Armour is listed as the cost, in Silver Pieces, per location. Banded/lamellar, for example,
         is priced at 800 SP per location. The Armour Pieces table then provides descriptions
         for the different composite pieces of armour and the Hit Locations covered. Greaves,
         for example, cover both legs.

         The cost for a named piece, such as Pants, that cover several locations is calculated
         per location. Banded Pants cover three locations and cost 2,400 SP. However, Game
         Masters may, if they wish, allow a composite piece of armour covering two or more
         locations to cost 10% less than the price per individual location. In the case of Banded
         Pants, the cost would therefore be 2,160 SP.


         Speciality Armour
         The armour already described forms the basis for the most common armour types in
         Legend. There are, however, certain specialised options as follows:

         Archer’s Armlet: A stiffened piece of leather worn on the inside of the forearm of most
         archers, protecting them from the bite of a slightly misfired bowstring.
                                                                                                       49
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                2
       Armour Types and Costs
       Armour              AP         Cost in Silver per Hit Location      ENC per Location
       Banded/Lamellar     3          800                                  2
       Bezainted           3          200                                  3
       Bone                2          300                                  2
       Brigandine          7          1,500                                3
       Chainmail           5          400                                  3
       Enamelled           4          1,600                                2
       Hard Leather        2          100                                  2
       Linen               2          75                                   1
       Plate               6          1,200                                3
       Ringmail            3          200                                  2
       Scalemail           4          250                                  2
       Soft Leather        1          50                                   1
       Wooden              3          350                                  3

       Armour Pieces Table
                          Hit Locations
       Name               Covered             Type of Armour
       Greaves            Legs                All
       Pants or Trews     Abdomen and         Soft Leather, Hard Leather, Ringmail,
                          Legs                Scalemail, Chainmail, Banded, Bezainted
       Skirt              Abdomen             All
       Hauberk            Chest and           Soft Leather, Hard Leather, Ringmail,
                          Abdomen             Scalemail, Chainmail, Banded, Bezainted
       Byrnie/Cuirass     Chest               Soft Leather, Linen, Ringmail, Chainmail,
       Breastplate        Chest               Banded/Lamellar, Bezainted, Bone, Enamelled,
                                              Plate, Wooden
       Sleeves/           Arms                All
       Vambraces
       Coif/Hood          Head                Soft and Hard Leather, Ringmail, Chainmail
       Coat               Chest, Arms and     Banded/Lamellar, Bezainted, Soft and Hard
                          Abdomen             Leather, Ringmail, Scalemail, Chainmail
       Helm               Head                Banded/Lamellar, Bezainted, Bone, Soft and
                                              Hard Leather, Scalemail, Plate, Wood

       Crabclaw Gauntlet: A specialised tool for one-handed duellists, the crabclaw gauntlet
       is a thick metal ‘glove’ that extends halfway up the arm, just like any other. The part
       of this gauntlet that is exceptional is the single folded plate that houses the first two
       fingers of the wearer’s hand. At the end of this thick finger-cuff is a latching mechanism
       that clasps the cuff to a socket at the base of the thumb plating – creating a sort of claw
       that holds any one-handed weapon firmly in its grip. Unless the gauntlet is actually
       broken, the wielder will continue to grasp the weapon or item within. A crabclaw
       gauntlet adds +50% to any tests used to resist being disarmed or having the clutched
       item taken from the gauntlet. It takes two Combat Actions to unlatch the glove.

 50
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                         2
         Specialised Armour
         Armour                    AP     ENC       Locations                           Cost
         Archer’s Armlet           1      1         Arm (wearer’s choice)               100 SP
         Crabclaw Gauntlet         4      1         Arm (wearer’s choice)               350 SP
         Duellist Half-cape        2      1         Chest, Arm (wearer’s choice)        400 SP
         False Plate (breast and   3      1         Abdomen, Chest                      500 SP
         back)
         False Plate (suit)        3      2         All                                 750 SP
         Full Helm                 6      2         Head                                1,400 SP
         Gauntlet, Heavy           3      1         Arms                                1,500 SP
         Gauntlet, Light           1      —         Arms                                500 SP
         Gauntlet, Medium          2      1         Arms                                1,000 SP
         Gladiator Manica          2      1         Arm                                 350 SP
         Plated Cloak              3      3         Abdomen, Arms, Chest, Legs          1,850 SP
         Plated Coat               3      2         Abdomen, Arms, Chest                1,500 SP
         Tightweave Silk (suit)    1      —         All                                 500 SP

         Duellists Half-Cape: This is a length of flexible cloth that is often cut into a draped
         cape of sorts that hangs over the chest and unused arm during a swordfight. A number
         of stiff leather strips are sewn into the cape here and there, giving additional protection
         to the areas they cover. The half-cape’s construction allows it to be twirled over one arm
         or the other as a Combat Reaction. This adds the cape’s Armour Points to the covered
         arm if desired. Also, if taken from around the chest and held in one hand, the half-cape
         can be used like a buckler – offering no AP protection, but allowing a +10% bonus to
         Parry Skill Tests.

         False Plate (breast and back): Made for the Adventurer who wants the look of
         expensive plate armour but not the cost, false plate is actually hard leather with a very
         thin riveted sheet of metal on top of it. To the casual observer, the clever sculpting and
         metallic sheen of the armour is likely to pass for the heavy and costly plate. Unless the
         armour is damaged enough that someone can see through the thin metal, it is almost
         indistinguishable (–25% to Perception tests) from normal plate armour.

         False Plate (suit): This is a complete suit of the cunning false plate armour, cut and
         fit to the wearer just as though it were real plate. At a glance it will fool nearly anyone,
         as it has all the same rules as the false plate breast; however, it is considerably lighter
         and does not clank and rattle quite the same. Someone fighting or running in a suit
         of false plate reduces the penalty to onlookers’ Perception tests against discovering its
         secret to –10%.

         Gauntlet, Heavy: A hinged, segmented glove made of several metal plates folded to
         fit the wearer, a heavy gauntlet completely eliminates the ability to manipulate objects
         with any sort of manual dexterity but protects the hand and forearm against injury. As
         a side note, the heavy gauntlet inflicts 1D4 bludgeoning damage if used to punch, but
         suffers a –10% penalty when used to attack in such a manner.

                                                                                                        51
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                 2
       Gauntlet, Light: Stiff leather with several sewn-in plates of metal, a light gauntlet
       is a common sight in most societies. It offers a degree of protection to the hand and
       forearm, with only a slight reduction in manual grace (–5% penalty to DEX-based
       activities). The light gauntlet is also a good standby for a falconry glove, and many
       falconers wear them for this reason alone.

       Gauntlet, Medium: A medium gauntlet is a leather cuff with metal finger plates
       sewn to a reinforced backing. It protects the wearer’s hand and forearm like any other
       gauntlet, but tends to keep the best of both worlds in its construction. The penalty
       to DEX-based activities is raised to –10% but the medium gauntlet offers greater
       protection than its light counterpart.

       Gladiator Manica: Worn by gladiators this is a chainmail sleeve that covers the
       shoulder and arm completely, held in place by straps across the torso. Typically only
       worn on one arm to keep the other free for weapon use.

       Plated Cloak: This is a thick wool or leather cloak that has dozens of small metal plates
       sewn inside the fabric. The plates make the cloak quite heavy, and the garment really
       only protects from attacks occurring from behind unless fully wrapped around the
       wearer, but it offers a considerable amount of protection. It takes a Combat Reaction
       to don the cloak (so long as the wearer has an open hand), and he cannot attack while
       doing so.
       	
       Plated Coat: This heavy leather coat has a high collar and tails that drop well past
       the waist to just above the knee, hemmed sleeves with buckles and pockets in several
       places. On the inside lining, which is commonly made of moleskin or soft leather, are
       several metal plates placed in key places (over the heart, kidneys, neck and so on) that
       absorb a good amount of damage when attacked. The coat is heavy, but some prefer it
       to heavier armour, as it takes half the time to put on or take off than a normal armour
       shirt or breastplate.

       Tightweave Silk (suit): Also nicknamed ‘assassin’s armour,’ the tightweave silk suit
       is a head-to-toe dyed-black silken bodysuit woven over a thin layer of treated leather.
       While it only offers the tiniest amount of protection from physical harm, it offers it
       to the entire body of the wearer – including the head, which is protected by a closed-
       drawn hood. Due to the nature of the armour, however, it does not pose any Skill
       Penalty. Contrarily, it adds +10% to the wearer’s Stealth score due to the quiet and dark
       design of the suit.


       Modifying Armour
       The following is a list of modifications that a qualified armoursmith could make
       to individual pieces of armour. These modifications are not simple for even master
       smiths and can use up massive amounts of time and money. Even the most trivial of
       modifications requires the smith to take the armour completely apart to be adjusted.
       Like modifying weapons, there is always a risk to the structural integrity of the armour
       and much of the time it is too expensive to experiment with.

 52
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                       2
         Armour Modifications
                       Average Time of       Modification
         Modification Modification           Restrictions            Difficulty Cost
         Bladed        1D4 days              Arms and Legs only      –5%        300 SP
         Camouflaged 2D10 hours              None                    +10%       x2 of base
                                                                                armour value
         Reinforced       1D6 weeks          Abdomen, Arms,          –20%       x5 of base
                                             Chest and Legs only                armour value
         Spiked           1D4 days           None                    –5%        250 SP
         Wintered         2D8 hours          None                    —          150 SP

         The Armour Modifications table shows the names of possible modifications, how long
         the process typically takes, any restrictions, the difficulty of the modification and the
         cost. A detailed description of each modification and an example of how it would look
         and affect a given piece of armour follows.

         Bladed: Riveting or forge-welding thin blades to forward pointing areas of the armour
         segment (foot, knee, back of hand and so on) gives the wearer an additional weapon
         that cannot be removed using the Grab Weapon Combat Manoeuvre. This blade is
         positioned to be used with a normal Unarmed attack, which is considered to be a
         dagger for the purposes of damage. These blades add +1 to the ENC of the armour.

         Camouflaged: Painting the armour with dyes, inks and strips of canvas to match the
         surroundings requested by the buyer, the armour can be made to be easily hidden in
         those surroundings. Each Hit Location that is covered by Camouflaged armour adds
         a cumulative +5% bonus to any Stealth Skill Tests made to hide in a surrounding
         matching the camouflage pattern. It is up to the Games Master to decide if the
         surroundings match but armour can only have one type of Camouflage at a time.

         Reinforced: An armoursmith can always add metal strips to existing armour to
         bolster its protective nature. Leather can be plated over, chainmail can be wired with
         thick spools of metal and even plate can be thickened. These modifications make the
         armour more durable and resistant to damage, but also make it far heavier and bulky.
         Reinforcing armour adds one Armour Point to it but makes it half-again (round up)
         its normal ENC. The Armour Penalty naturally increases if the armour is reinforced.

         Spiked: Adding long spikes to specific areas of armour can make any style of armour into
         a risky proposition for opponents relying on Unarmed and natural attacks. Anyone that
         strikes a section of the body covered by a spiked armour segment with his bare flesh will
         suffer 1D3 damage. Also, grappling with or being grappled by someone who is wearing
         spiked armour segments will inflict 1D4 damage each round to a random Hit Location.
         Spiking armour adds 1 ENC worth of spikes and rivets to the weight of the armour; it also
         increases the Armour Penalty by 1 – even though the armour itself gains no additional AP.

         Wintered: Adhering thick leather or furs to all of the spaces in normal armour, an
         armoursmith can insulate any armour against the bitter cold and stiff wind of winter

                                                                                                     53
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                              2
       or mountaintop travels. This makes the armour entirely uncomfortable to wear in
       any other climate, and very heavy and unwieldy, but can make all the difference in
       such harsh environments. Wintering armour makes it very warm and snug, granting
       a +15% bonus to any Survival and Resilience Skill Tests against extreme cold or
       winter-like conditions. However, its ENC and Armour Penalty are raised by 1. Also,
       wearing the armour in any moderate or warmer temperature causes a level of Fatigue
       every hour the wearer is clad in the wintered armour.


       The Armour Modification Process
       An armoursmith making modifications to an armour segment must spend the allotted
       time doing the work in a proper forge or workshop, suffering severe penalties for trying
       to do them outside of such environments (–20 to –50% commonly). Once the time
       has been spent doing the work required, the armoursmith makes the adjusted Craft
       (Armourer) skill roll. The outcomes of possible results of that Skill Test are below.

       Critical Success: The modification went smoothly, and the armoursmith was able to
       do some additional adjusting as he went along. Any additional increase in the armour’s
       Armour Penalty is negated.

       Success: The modification is complete and all the bonuses and penalties described
       above are applied.

       Failure: The modification is more time consuming than first thought. The modification
       process must be repeated in order to finish it.

       Fumble: The modification process was too invasive or sloppy and the armour segment
       has suffered some form of damage. Not only must the process be repeated in order to
       finish the modification, but the wearer suffers an additional 1 point Armour Penalty
       due to a lack of comfort and other restrictions owing to the poor workmanship.


       Alternate Armour Materials
       The Alternate Armour Materials table shows a variety of alternate materials that have
       interesting effects upon armour. The table shows the material, the modifier to Craft
       Skill Tests trying to make armour from it and the suggested cost multiplier involved. It
       should be noted that some of these materials may not be available in all cultures, game
       settings or campaigns – that is ultimately up to the Games Master.

       Coral: The building blocks of some of the largest and most impressive undersea
       constructions, coral is jagged, sharp and able to withstand the crushing force of the
       tides. Of course, it makes above adequate armour. Not only does it come in a variety
       of colours and textures, it is very durable and must be chiselled very specifically in
       order to make armour. Users beware, however, as it is very porous and seems to absorb
       and hold water quite easily. Although only available in areas near an ocean shore or
       island community, coral is plentiful where it can be found at all – making it a rather
       inexpensive (relatively speaking) material.


 54
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                      2
         +1 AP is added to armour made from coral or containing coral parts. Coral armour is
         always considered to have the Spiked modification, but must triple its ENC whenever
         significantly wet (hard rain, swimming and so on). Only armour types with rigid pieces
         (scalemail, banded, plate and so on) can be carved or sculpted from coral.

         Dwarfen Cinder: Named after one of the most common blacksmith-centric races in
         mythic lore, ‘Dwarfen’ cinder is really just armour made from over-tempered metal
         ore. It is vastly heavier than common metals and alloys, and is very resistant to physical
         damage. However, it is terribly brittle and has been known to shatter like glass when
         struck just right.

         Dwarfen cinder armour has a massive +2 AP bonus but doubles its weight in ENC. If a
         Critical Hit is scored against Dwarfen cinder, there is a 15% of it shattering into useless
         pieces. Only armour types with rigid pieces (scalemail, banded, plate and so on) can be
         carved or sculpted from Dwarfen Cinder.

         Elven Silk: ‘Elven’ silk is an extremely supple fabric that is interwoven with thinly spun
         wires of copper or steel. This inner-weave makes it strong, flexible and resilient. Sheets
         of the material have a glimmer and shine to them that can sometimes lend the belief
         that Elven silk is somehow magical.

         Elven silk has +1 AP and the Armour Penalty is reduced by 1. Only armour types with
         large cloth or leather sections (leather, gladiator, capes and cloaks and so on) can be
         tailored from Elven silk.

         Gold: Soft as far as metals go, gold is not the best material for crafting battle-ready
         armour. However, its very existence symbolises wealth and nobility and shines like the
         light of the sun itself. It is very costly to make any sort of armour segment out of gold,
         with most armourers viewing the use of gold for armour as an utter waste of good
         resources.

         Gold armour suffers a –1 AP penalty and doubles its ENC score due to its being so soft,
         malleable and heavy. Wearers suffer an additional two point increase to the Armour

         Alternate Armour Materials
         Alternate Material Craft skill Modifier            Cost Multiplier
         Coral              –20%                            x2
         Dwarfen Cinder     –15%                            x3
         Elven Silk         +10%                            x5
         Gold               –15%                            x12
         Monster Hide       Varies                          Varies
         Steel              –10%                            x4
         Wondrous Metal     –75%                            x20 (and have materials on hand*)
         * It is up to the Games Master to decide how much of a substance is enough to craft the
         armour in question.


                                                                                                       55
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                2
       Penalty. However, anyone clad in gold armour can add +5% per Hit Location to his
       Influence skill. Any armour can have its plates, rivets or adornments made with solid
       gold if the Games Master allows it.

       Steel: Steel is an alloy of iron and either carbon, manganese, chromium, vanadium,
       or tungsten. Steel is harder and more durable than iron but require different smelting
       techniques to create which may not be known in all cultures. The process for creating
       steel is reflected in its x4 Cost Multiplier.

       Items made from steel gain +1 AP. There is no increase in ENC.

       Wondrous Metal: Wondrous Metal is any special metal found in a particular settings
       that has incredible natural properties because it is of divine origin say, or originates on
       a plane where incredibly strong and durable metals are found. Mithril, for example, is
       an example of a wondrous metal.

       Wondrous metals create items that have +1 AP and +1 HP. There is no increase in
       ENC. The names of wondrous metals are for Games Masters to create for their settings
       and may be relatively common or not even exist at all.


       Creature Hide Armour
       The Monster Hide Armour table displays the difficulty and skills needed to transform
       the hide of a freshly killed beast into a new suit of armour for an Adventurer to wear, as
       well as the final statistics of that armour. As including a separate entry for each creature
       that might potentially be made into armour would make for a long and cumbersome
       table, individual entries for each creature are excluded in favour of grouping them by
       the resiliency of their natural armour. AP 6 to AP 9, for example.

       If a hide is to be made into armour, it must be harvested from the carcass and
       prepared within 48 hours of the creature’s death. Generally, this requires a normal
       Craft (Leatherworking) Skill Test, though the Games Master may assign a penalty for
       particularly odd beasts. Adventurers may also attempt to successfully (and properly)
       harvest a beast’s hide with a Hard (–40%), Lore (Animal) or Survival Skill Test.

       Some creatures’ hides may not be suitable for use as armour, no matter how tempting
       they may seem to an Adventurer. For example, the hide of a behemoth is nearly
       impenetrable. However, the behemoth does not gain this amazing AP from having
       skin as hard as a diamond. Certainly, its hide is tough, but it gains much of its AP due
       to the fact that its hide is also nearly 30 centimetres thick. Obviously, it is possible
       to make armour from a behemoth’s hide, but the average human would be virtually
       unable to move in something so cumbersome. Likewise, the Games Master may wish
       to rule that the hides of some creatures simply cannot be made into armour. In general,
       creatures with a natural AP greater than 25 are unsuitable candidates for harvesting
       armour from, as they usually gain these high APs from some factor other than simple
       toughness of their skin.


 56
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                          2
         Monster Hide Armour
                                                       ENC (head/     ENC
         Natural AP     Armour    Craft     Time       per arm/per    (abdomen/    Sale Price
         of Creature    AP        Penalty   Required   leg)           chest)       (by armour AP)
         1-5            1-2       –0%       2 days     ½ ENC          1 ENC        150 SP per AP
         6-9            3-4       –10%      5 days     1 ENC          1 ENC        175 SP per AP
         10-13          5-6       –20%      10 days    1½ ENC         2 ENC        500 SP per AP
         14-17          7-8       –30%      20 days    2 ENC          3 ENC        750 SP per AP
         18-19          9         –50%      30 days    2½ ENC         4 ENC        750 SP per AP
         20-21          10        –100%     60 days    3 ENC          5 ENC        1,500 SP per AP
         22-23          11        –150%     90 days    3½ ENC         6 ENC        2,500 SP per AP
         24-25          12        –200%     180 days   4 ENC          7 ENC        5,000 SP per AP
         +5             +1        –50%      +90 days   +½ ENC         +1 ENC       +2,500 SP per AP

         An Adventurer can wear armour made from a creature of no less than double his own
         SIZ. If the creature has a SIZ less than that, it may still be made into armour, but may
         only cover a limited number of Hit Locations . If a creature has a magical ability of some
         kind invested in its skin, that ability does not remain in armour constructed of its hide.

         The type of armour a creature is made into depends primarily on what sort of creature
         it was in life. Animals with a pliant skin, for example, will be made into a hide armour
         that approximates the movement of leather (though its properties may be different).
         Armour made from a dragon or wyvern will most closely approximate scale mail in
         appearance, while armour constructed from the chitin of a great insect will most closely
         resemble plate mail.

         Generally, armour crafted from a creature’s hide has a lower AP than the creature enjoyed
         in life. However, some armourers of surpassing skill are able to preserve the creature’s
         full AP in the armour they craft, substituting the rigidity of the creature’s musculature
         with their own preservation processes. Obviously, such armourers are rare and difficult
         to find, although someone with a dragon hide who wishes to have the creature’s entire
         AP preserved in armour may be willing to put in the effort. Finding someone able to
         perform such work should be a Quest in itself. In general, however, armour crafted from
         a creature’s hide will have half the AP the creature had when alive. The values reflected
         on the Monster Hide Armour table assume the final product will indeed have half the
         creature’s AP. If the Games Master wishes to allow for ‘full AP’ armour to be made, the
         craft penalties, time required and sale price should go up dramatically.

         Armour Wear Values
         Original      Protected                                                        Cost to
         AP Value      Wear           Basic Wear       Common Wear     Rigorous Wear    Repair
         1-2           AP x10 weeks   AP x5 weeks      AP x2 weeks     AP in weeks      AP x2 SP
         3             AP x20 weeks   AP x10 weeks     AP x5 weeks     AP x2 weeks      AP x5 SP
         4-5           AP x30 weeks   AP x20 weeks     AP x10 weeks    AP x5 weeks      AP x10 SP
         6-10          Unlimited      AP x30 weeks     AP x20 weeks    AP x10 weeks     AP x25 SP
         10+           Unlimited      Unlimited        AP x30 weeks    AP x20 weeks     AP x100 SP

                                                                                                      57
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                               2
       The costs on the table on page 57 should be considered to be small city and large city
       costs. Armour crafted from the skin of some fantastic beast is generally far too exotic
       to be found in a smaller population centre – and for those Adventurers interested in
       selling such an item, it will be all but impossible to find an interested buyer amongst
       the herders and farmers of the hinterlands.


       Repairing Armour
       Unless stated by a weapon, spell or environmental effect, armour does not suffer
       massive amounts of structural damage from most sources. After all, it is designed to
       protect the wearer and help shrug off damage. This means that all armour will slowly
       weather and wear down over the weeks of its use and abuse, eventually requiring a
       little repair here and there. As an Adventurer goes about his quests and adventures, he
       will periodically need to repair or replace his armour or quickly find himself without
       it. Armour damaged by the Sunder Combat Manoeuvre requires obvious attention to
       repair it.

       Depending on the Armour Points of the armour and the level of ‘wear and tear’ the
       armour sees, it can go a number of weeks before even losing any of its efficiency. The
       table shows the number of weeks an armour segment can go between repairs (varied by
       degree of use), and roughly how much it should cost to do so.

       Protected Wear: This level of wear defines armour in storage or on display, but not
       actually being worn more than a few minutes a day. Also, to be considered ‘Protected’
       it cannot see any form of combat.

       Basic Wear: This level of wear defines armour that is worn for special occasions or while
       on duty at a specific career. The armour can be worn only for a few hours a day at most,
       and cannot be subjected to the punishments of combat without losing its ‘Basic’ status.

       Common Wear: This level of wear defines a normal Adventurer’s life. Travel, all-day
       wearing and the occasional bloody battle with the hazards of the quest at hand, these
       are just some of the reasons an Adventurer must get his armour repaired from time to
       time.

       Rigorous Wear: This level of wear defines armour that is being really put to the test. Soldiers
       that wear their gear day and night, Adventurers travelling in sandstorm-prone deserts and
       armour that sees mythic combat every other day should fall into this level of wear.

       Armour that goes too long without repairs might not withstand the rigours of combat
       and become useless at the worst possible moment. It is up to the Games Masters to
       decide exactly what happens when armour has gone too long without a maintenance.




 58
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                             2
         WEAPONRY
         Few Adventurers get far without a weapon of some kind. In many cultures weapon training
         is a part of the formative years of every youth, even in civilised lands where people tend to
         have greater isolation from environmental dangers than those of the other cultures.

         So, this chapter details personal weapons: from knives through to polearms; slings
         through to crossbows. All the weapons listed in the Legend Core Rulebook are present
         and correct but supplemented by weapons from many different cultures and eras
         allowing Legend Games Masters to bring these arms into play whatever historical
         period is being tackled.


         Close Combat Weapons
         Close Combat weapons follow the Characteristics found in the Legend Core Rulebook,
         having a series of attributes that determine and influence their use. These characteristics
         are summarised in the Close Combat Weapons table; preceding that is a brief description
         of the weapon itself. Read this description – it may contain important details that have
         a bearing on skills, Combat Manoeuvres and so forth.

         At the end of the chapter is a treatment of black-powder weapons: firearms. These
         are not the sophisticated firearms of a modern period but the embryonic, somewhat
         crude weapons such as muskets that mark the shift from traditional ranged weapons
         to the beginnings of a certain degree of industrialisation. Just because these weapons
         are listed and described does not mean they should be made available or used in all
         Legend settings: in most published settings for the game they are eschewed. However,
         Legend’s flexibility allows adventures to occur in any largely pre-industrialised era and
         so their inclusion is there to assist with campaigns based in those eras where swords and
         muskets do co-exist (a pirate campaign, for example, or the English Civil War).


         Weapon Characteristics
         Category: The type of weapon this is: one handed or two handed.

         Damage Dice: The damage the weapon deals on a successful attack. If a weapon has
         two Damage Dice entries, the first is for using the weapon one handed and the second
         for two handed damage.

         STR/DEX: The minimum STR and DEX scores needed to easily wield this weapon.
         For every point a Characteristic is below these minimums, a –5% penalty is applied to
         an Adventurer’s skill when attacking and parrying with this weapon.
                                                                                                         59
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                  2
       Size: Each weapon possesses a size rating. This is related to its mass, leverage and
       stability. The value is used to determine both the weapon’s ability to inflict and
       parry damage. The size categories are Small (S), Medium (M), Large (L), Huge
       (H) and Enormous (E).

       Reach: The weapon’s length, how far it can reach in combat. The size categories are
       Touch (T), Short (S), Medium (M), Long (L) and Very Long (VL).

       Combat Manoeuvres: The Combat Manoeuvres a weapon can inflict – such as
       Bashing, Impale and so forth.

       ENC: The weight and bulk of the weapon.

       AP/HP: The Armour Points and Hit Points possessed by the weapon. When Hit
       Points reach 0, the weapon is broken and useless.

       Cost: The average cost in Silver Pieces to purchase this weapon.


       Weapon Descriptions
       Archer’s Blade: A long sword-like blade fitted to the outside edges of any bow, the
       archer’s blade allows a ranged combat specialist to have a potentially lethal weapon at
       his disposal to defend himself when unable to draw another weapon. It adds its 1 ENC
       to the bow, which also makes it slightly front heavy (–5% to Bow style).

       Awl Pike: Nearly two-metres of shaft topped by a simple armour-punching head and
       a body-catching crossbar, the awl pike is extremely useful for bringing armoured riders
       off their mounts. By sinking the metal-capped butt of the pike into the ground just
       before accepting a mounted charge, the target is impaled on the pike but held fast by
       the crossbar – his mount running out from beneath him. Any charging mounted target
       that is struck by the awl pike when set for a charge must make a make a Ride or Drive
       roll opposed by the awl user’s Combat Style roll. If the rider loses the opposed test he is
       thrown from the mount suffering any additional damage due to falling.

       Ball & Chain: This heavy metal ball attached to a short length of chain is notoriously
       difficult to parry. An opponent attempting to parry this weapon treats his parrying
       weapon or shield as one step smaller for the purposes of blocking damage. However,
       the wielder also suffers the same penalty when trying to Parry with the ball & chain.

       Bastard Sword: The bastard sword is a versatile sword with an elongated grip, which
       allows it to be used with either one hand or two. Any bastard sword can be fitted
       with a widened set of pommel-guards, adding +5% to Parry Skill Tests with it, for an
       additional 10 SP.

       Battleaxe: A single-bladed weapon with a sturdy haft, the battleaxe may be used with
       one or two hands, depending on the wielder’s preference. A battleaxe can be used to


 60
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                         2
         bash through doors and obstacles rather quickly. It suffers no damage when attacking
         inanimate wooden objects.

         Bill: A polearm with a hooked blade, the bill descended (and was often recycled) from
         a common agricultural implement. It is a very effective way of ‘hooking’ past defences,
         thus a mounted defender does not get the standard +20% Parry bonus against a bill.

         Broadsword: Similar in design and nature to a bastard sword, a broadsword has a
         wider blade and is balanced to be used, primarily, one-handed – although it can be
         used with two.

         Buckler: This small, round shield is held in the hand, and used to ‘punch block’
         incoming blows. Bucklers are often used to attack with the off-hand, when the main
         weapon is tied up. Its small size however, provides little protection against larger
         weapons or missile fire.

         Burning Glove: This thick leather glove has an interior lining of fire resistant animal
         hide and stone. Its surface is covered with sticky tar and a variety of reagents. As a
         standard action the wearer may ignite the glove. The glove burns for three rounds.
         During that time any unarmed attack made by the wearer causes an extra 1D3 damage
         due to the flames. The wearer also takes one point of fire damage every round to the
         arm where the glove is worn (ignoring armour). Each glove can only be used once.

         Cestus: The cestus is a leather gauntlet spiked, studded and reinforced to cause terrible
         wounds to a target that is punched with it. It makes the hand wielding it all but
         useless to carry out any task other than hitting or pushing, and cannot be used for
         Parry attempts. Few warriors choose a cestus over more traditional weaponry, but some
         brawlers and sadists prefer it.

         Chain: This two metre length of chain is one step above using an improvised weapon.
         It is notoriously difficult to parry and imposes a –10% penalty to an opponent’s Parry
         roll. However, the wielder also suffers a –10% penalty to Parry with this weapon. If an
         opponent is caught by surprise, it can also be used as a garrotte (see entry on page 63).

         Chakram: This is a wide ring of tempered metal that has been given a decent sharpening
         over its outermost edge. It often has a crossbar or handle built into the centre to be used
         as a combat weapon, or to enable the user to throw it without hurting an unprotected
         hand. The chakram is designed to be thrown with blinding speed and can inflict terrible
         wounds as it spins into bare flesh.

         Club: Perhaps the simplest of all weapons and almost certainly the oldest, the club is
         simply a long, stout piece of wood used to bludgeon others. However, there are several
         cultures that have carved and cast clubs made of stone, bone or even metal – all of
         which can be sculpted or decorated according to the wielder’s preference.



                                                                                                       61
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                2
       Cutlass: The infamous pirate’s cutlass is a slightly curved, single-edged, mid-sized
       sword with a basket hilt. It can inflict fast and flashing wounds but is not designed for
       inflicting massive amounts of damage. Its basket hilt adds a +10% bonus to any Parry
       Skill Tests made with the weapon.

       Dagger: Essentially a large knife attached to a short handle, the dagger is often carried
       as a backup or parrying weapon. Thieves, assassins and bandits often enjoy the use of
       daggers because they can be hidden and drawn with ease. Daggers are usually well-
       balanced enough to throw effectively.

       Dart Blade: Either a wooden projectile tipped with a metal blade or a single-forged
       metal throwing blade about the size of a man’s thumb, a dart blades is normally used
       as a last ditch weapon. Dart blades are small enough to be hidden very simply and
       offer a +10% bonus to Sleight tests in order to conceal them. They can be used in
       melee combat if necessary, but are far more suited for throwing. Although unable to
       inflict much damage individually, up to three dart blades can be thrown at a single
       target in one Combat Action. When throwing multiple dart blades make a Combat
       Style roll for each blade at a cumulative –10% penalty per additional blade above the
       first. Dart blades can be Evaded or parried with a shield: if the Evade or Parry roll is
       successful then all dart blades have been countered.

       Dirk: This is a short-handled, wide-bladed weapon about half-again the size of a dagger.
       It is commonly used as a secondary weapon, even though it promises sufficient damage
       any time its blade bites flesh. Parrying with a dirk increases the damage blocked by one
       step (i.e. it is treated as a Medium weapon when parrying).

       Falchion: A single edged, cleaver-like sword that delivers heavy, chopping blows.

       Fang Shield: A middle-sized shield shaped like an oversized arrowhead or spear tip,
       the fang shield is so-named because it most commonly has two long spikes protruding
       from its bottom. Worn lengthwise rather than sideways on the arm, the fang shield is as
       much a stabbing weapon as it is a protective tool. As the shield must be secured firmly
       to the arm, it is immune to the Grab Weapon Combat Manoeuvre.

       Flamberge: A painstakingly forged sword with a swept and caged hilt, the flamberge
       has an irregular and wavy edge to both sides of its blade. Not only able to deliver
       significant blows, but also designed to deal with other sword wielders, the flamberge is
       a favourite of duellists. The protective hilt adds a +10% bonus to the Parry Skill Tests of
       the wielder. The specially designed blade rings against other swords with a particularly
       odd vibration, making it difficult to hold a defence for long against a flamberge wielder.
       Every time another sword parries a flamberge, its Parry skill is reduced by –5% for the
       rest of the round.

       Gaff: Another useful weapon that sprang from the likes of a tool, the gaff is a two-
       metre long wooden pole with a curved metal hook and a spike at one end. It is often
       wrapped in leather at the centre and was originally used for drawing rope up from the
       surface of water onto the deck of a boat. Sailors quickly learned that the tool was just
       as useful in hooking pirate flesh as well!
 62
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                         2
         Gandasa: An interesting variety of the great axe, a gandasa is a wooden shaft roughly
         as tall as the user. Nearly half of its length is dominated by a huge polished blade.
         Originally used as an executioner’s beheading axe, the gandasa is very top heavy and
         inflicts horrible wounds against prone targets. Should the target of a gandasa strike be
         held in place and unable to parry, the weapon inflicts an additional 1D6 damage from
         the forward momentum of the attack.

         Garrotte: An assassin’s weapon, the garrotte is a cord, chain or thin braided metal
         wire used to loop around a target’s neck and strangle him. Only usable during a
         grapple or from behind on an unsuspecting victim, the garrotte inflicts its damage
         each and every Combat Action the wielder continues to actively crush his victim’s
         throat. Whilst being strangled, the victim can attempt to wrestle free, or damage his
         opponent so badly they are forced to let go – but acts at a penalty due to the strangler
         being directly behind him.

         Glaive: A chopping blade mounted on a polearm shaft, the glaive is like an extended
         axe with a reinforced handle. It is one of the quintessential polearms and the favourite of
         infantry soldiers. Some glaives can be fitted with a spear or awl pike head by adding half
         that weapon’s cost to the glaive – effectively making the weapon into two, depending
         on which end is put to the enemy.

         Great Axe: Up to two metres in length, dwarfing the battleaxe in size, the great axe may
         be either single or double-bladed and must be used with both hands. It also suffers no
         damage when used to break inanimate wooden objects.

         Great Club: Little more than a massive trunk of wood banded in metal, a great club is
         much less a designed weapon as it is a makeshift one. Some cultures might create their
         own varieties of stone or other materials, but overall the great club is the weapon of
         choice for low-intelligence, low-resource beings of massive strength and size.

         Great Hammer: The great hammer, or maul, is an enormous weapon that deals impressive
         bludgeoning damage. It is both a tool and a weapon, and can sometimes be found with a
         pick-like spike on the back portion of its head. Great hammers may be used on inanimate
         objects without being destroyed.

         Great Sword: This group nomenclature pertains to a number of massive blades that
         can be found as much as two metres in length. They are used by those warriors who
         want the enemy at more than arm’s length, or cleaved beneath the sheer girth of the
         weapon’s strike. Part of the blade is unsharpened and leather-bound on many great
         swords, allowing the wielder to grip them for more effective parries and thrusts.

         Halberd: An axe head combined with a thrusting tip and a hook, mounted on a spear
         shaft, the halberd is a multi-purpose weapon. Halberdiers are versatile opponents that
         can bring any version of the weapon’s attack to bear in an instant.

         Harpoon: A slightly shortened longspear with a sharp bladed head serrated with rear-
         facing hooks, the harpoon is another boatman’s tool turned into ship defence weapon.
                                                                                                       63
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                2
       Its sharp head was built to slice through bony fish or whale blubber equally well and
       sets extremely well when plunged into a target. Not only can the harpoon be used in
       fishing, adding +10% to any Survival Skill Tests used to catch fish in such a manner
       but any target hastily removing an Impaled harpoon suffers an additional 2 points of
       damage from the rear-facing barbs.

       Hatchet or Hand Axe: A simple and very cheap one-handed cleaving weapon, the
       hatchet is essentially a smaller version of an axe. It is as much a tool as it is a weapon,
       and can be used to cut through wooden inanimate objects with no risk to its edge. It
       is usually well-balanced enough to throw effectively and many users prefer to call these
       items ‘throwing axes’.

       Heater Shield: A medium sized shield designed for both mounted and foot use. Most
       are reinforced with metal edging and commonly have some form of symbol or insignia
       painted on the outside face. Heater shields can parry ranged weapons.

       Heavy Mace: In Legend the Mace refers to a light mace, which has its own entry in the
       weapon table. A heavy mace is a longer, heftier variant designed to be used two handed
       to batter through even the heaviest of armour. The heavy mace is comprised of a large
       weight mounted on one end of a haft and reinforced with heavy bands of metal to keep
       the weight from snapping the shaft.

       Hoplite Shield: Large circular shields designed for foot combat, which are edged
       and sometimes faced with metal. This shield is an excellent defence against even two
       handed weapons and provides decent cover against missile attacks.

       Iris: Named for the flower, an iris is a small, handheld dagger-like weapon forged
       with a slight curve – which slightly resembles a petal from its namesake. The curve
       of the blade makes it difficult to forge without seeking a master smith and robs it of
       the aerodynamics found in a dagger. Instead, when stabbing a target with an iris, the
       weapon digs in at an angle – allowing for deep and painful wounds.

       Katana: The Japanese sword of the Samurai, a katana is a slightly curved, single edged
       sword made using ancient and special techniques. The katana is a viciously sharp
       weapon that can slice through flesh like a razor. With a longer hilt wrapped in cloth or
       leather, the katana is traditionally used with two hands. Although vicious when striking
       flesh, armour holds a problem for the easily deflected edge of folded blades, meaning
       that any target struck gains a +2 bonus to its non-natural Armour Points against katana
       attacks.

       Khopesh: A strange and fabulous sword, the khopesh has a sickle-like blade with its
       outside curve bearing the edge of the weapon. The shape of the weapon makes for
       heavier blows but at the expense of the blade’s speed. Therefore, all attacks and parries
       made by the khopesh are at –5%.

       Kite Shield: Kite shields are large shields with an inverted teardrop shape. This shield
       can switch between both infantry and mounted use, and is extremely popular for those
 64
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                         2
         who spend time in both types of combats. Kite shields are also effective against ranged
         weapons.

         Knife: Knives can be made from a sharp piece of metal, stone, bone or even glass.
         They almost always have a short hilt carved from wood. More commonly a tool than a
         weapon, the knife is a multi-purpose item that should be found in every Adventurer’s
         backpack.

         Knuckledusters: The term ‘knuckledusters’ describes a large category of metallic
         bands, spikes, rings or blocks worn around the fingers in order to cause more damage
         when punching. Knuckledusters are commonly found in the pockets of thugs and bar
         room brawlers.

         Kris: Most commonly used by priests and ritualists in their ceremonies, a kris – or kris
         knife – is a fancy blade forged with waved edges and an asymmetrical hilt. It is not
         designed specifically for combat, and suffers a –5% to all Parry rolls, but can inflict
         deep wounds.

         Kukri: A wide, forward curved blade made for chopping; the kukri has a single wedge-
         like edge used for cutting very deep gashes in flesh and bone. Similar to an axe in how it
         strikes, the kukri is traditionally used for removing limbs or beheading targets in single
         strokes. Should a kukri strike a target that is prone or utterly unaware of the attacker,
         the attack inflicts an additional 1D3 damage.

         Kunai: Originally used as a peasant digging tool, the kunai is a roughly triangular
         piece of wrought metal with a rope or cloth wrapped handle. Usable as a dagger in

                                                                                                      65
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                               2
       close combat, or as a thrown projectile, the kunai is a multi-purpose weapon for
       commoners.

       Lance: An oversized spear designed to be used from the back of a mount, a lance can be
       a devastating weapon when charging. A mounted Adventurer who uses a lance during a
       charge may add his mount’s Damage Modifier instead of his own to the damage.

       Light Mace: The mace is comprised of a large flanged or knobbed weight mounted on
       one end of a haft, which is often reinforced with metal. Its ability to incapacitate, even
       heavily armoured opponents, makes this a popular weapon in civilised cultures. Note:
       this is the equivalent of the Mace found in the Legend Core Rulebook.

       Long Spear: The long spear is a lengthy piercing weapon, often used in ranked units
       to defeat charging cavalry.

       Longsword: The longsword is a versatile sword with an elongated grip, which allows it
       to be wielded with either one hand or two. Its extra length adds to its reach, and used
       two handed it inflicts greater damage.

       Lucerne Hammer: This heavy weapon has a weighted pick-hammer head attached to a
       reinforced polearm shaft. Its chisel-like spike punches through thick plate armour with
       ease, rending flesh and organs to ruin in a single stroke. It is thick-handled and very
       front heavy, imposing a –10% penalty on Parry attempts with the weapon. However,
       the weapon ignores 1 point of non-magical AP with each strike.

       Main Gauche: Also called a ‘parrying dagger’, the main gauche is a long-bladed dagger
       with two extremely long and strong quillions. It is normally used in the off-hand in
       conjunction with a longsword, rapier or sabre. Parrying with a main gauche increases
       the damage blocked by one step (it is treated as a Medium weapon when parrying).

       Mancatcher: The mancatcher is a stout rod of reinforced wood built with a spring-
       loaded claw at the end, triggered like a snare when thrust at a target. When used
       properly, the mancatcher snaps closed around arms, legs, the neck or even waist of a
       target with a SIZ of 15 or less, holding it at the mercy of the wielder. A mancatcher
       can use the Grip manoeuvre usually reserved for unarmed attacks – and at a significant
       Reach.

       Military Flail: This is a heavy metal ball or rod, usually bristling with spikes or edged
       flanges, attached to a wooden haft by a short length of chain. Due to its flexible
       construction, an opponent defending against this weapon treats his parrying weapon
       or shield as one step smaller for the purposes of blocking damage. However, the wielder
       also suffers the same penalty when trying to Parry with the flail.

       Military Pick: A thick-spiked metal head similar to a conical mattock attached to a
       metal or wooden shaft, the military pick is designed to pierce heavy armour. Many
       are built with spikes on opposite sides of the head, like those used by miners. Military
       picks are very dense and tool-like, and may be used on inanimate objects without being
 66
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                        2
         destroyed. A military pick ignores the first Armour Point of non-natural armour when
         it strikes.

         Moon Axe: A long haft topped with a blade shaped like a thick crescent moon, its
         points outward, the moon axe is heavy and powerful when swung in a wide arc. Its
         blade is exceptionally good at cupping around limbs or other extremities, lopping them
         off in single strokes in many cases. A moon axe is not built for the defensive-minded,
         and suffers a –10% penalty to any Parry attempts with it.

         Morningstar: Carved from a length of wood nearly a metre long, the morningstar is a
         bladed or spiked cudgel.

         Naginata: This is a Japanese thick-hafted polearm with a curved, axe-like blade at its
         very tip, often with a notched or wavy blade. It is traditionally decorated and polished,
         making it as beautiful as it is deadly. Much like the more military halberd, the naginata
         can be used like a chopping axe or a thrusting polearm, cleaving through targets easily
         enough either way.

         Net: Used by gladiators, huntsmen and watchmen, the net is more than a mere fishing
         net to be tossed at a target. A fighter’s net is made of thick cord and leather, tipped with
         numerous hooks and heavy weights. It can be swung like flail, the weights lashing out
         to batter an opponent, inflicting the damage listed.

         Ninja-to: The sword of the infamous Japanese ninja, this is a shorter, straight-bladed
         version of the folded metal blade with a wider hilt guard. Just like its larger, curved
         cousins such as the katana, the ninja-to has all the benefits and drawbacks of folded
         metal blades, meaning that any target struck gains a +2 bonus to its non-natural
         Armour Points against ninja-to attacks. Many ninja-to swords have hollowed hilts that
         can hold a small (less than 1 ENC) item, and have their blades painted black with
         grease or charcoal to decrease any shine.

         No-Dachi: The Japanese great sword, the no-dachi is the largest of the folded metal
         swords, and can be as long as two metres. It has a curved blade like its smaller brother,
         the katana, and is a heavy weapon to use like a conventional sword. Requiring that the
         user assume a low stance and set his hands wide on the hilt, the no-dachi can be thrust
         forward at an approaching foe. This stabbing method is the no-dachi swordsman’s
         answer to a lack of swinging room, or to the fast approach of cavalry. Just like its
         smaller cousins, the no-dachi has all the benefits and drawbacks of folded metal blades,
         meaning that any target struck gains a +2 bonus to its non-natural Armour Points
         against no-dachi attacks.

         Nunchaku: A nunchaku, which is two baton-like lengths of wood connected at one
         end by a hand’s length of rope or chain, is a weapon for the fighter with agile hands.
         Nunchakus are commonly used in quick strikes; the wielder lashes out with one side
         or the other of the weapon, using momentum and speed to get past defences. A skilled
         nunchaku user can attack from several different angles without so much as changing
         his fighting stance, and land several blows in rapid succession. Attacks from nunchaku
                                                                                                        67
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                 2
       are increasingly difficult to Parry, with a cumulative –5% penalty to the target’s Parry
       skill per nunchaku attack in a single Combat Round. As well as imparting damage,
       nunchaku can also be used to target an opponent’s arms or weapon and Entangle or
       Disarm.

       Poleaxe: A polearm about the height of a man, it has a hammer head backed with a
       metal spike, and a spear tip for thrusting. This style of two handed war hammer is very
       popular against heavy armour types.

       Poniard: This duellist’s weapon is a long dagger, designed to be thrust into a target.

       Quarterstaff: A simple staff, sometimes banded with metal at either end. In the hands
       of a skilled user, it is a fast and effective weapon for both offence and defence, and can
       be hidden in plain sight as a shepherd’s hook or simple traveller’s walking staff.

       Rapier: Fast and light, the rapier relies more on the thrust than the slash. It is a
       particularly effective weapon, especially considering its reach.

       Rondel: The rondel is a knife named for its disc-shaped hilt guard and pommel, both
       of which allow for added force behind stabbing thrusts. Most rondels have a longish
       blade that is wide at the bottom and tapers to a point, although some may be rounded
       at the tip. The rondel is a basic enough weapon that requires very little in the manner
       of training or skill to use properly.

       Sabre: The sabre is a slightly curved sword, designed to be used for slashing or thrusting
       when mounted. It has a basket hilt which adds 1 Armour Point to the limb being used
       to wield it.

       Sai: Simple in design, the sai is a dagger-like weapon that does not actually carry an
       edge except at the last bit of the tip of its three prongs. Unlike a knife wielder, a sai
       fighter will only use the very tip of the central prong to drag shallow furrows in flesh
       when slashing – though the weapon is far deadlier when driven deep enough into
       the wound to sink the other two prongs into the target as well. When performing a
       stabbing attack that is not Parried a sai fighter inflicts an additional +2 damage. Also,
       the three-pronged design of the sai allows it to turn and capture bladed weapons.
       Anyone using a sai is able to use the Pin Weapon Combat Manoeuvre without having
       to score a critical success first.

       Scimitar: A broad-bladed sword, the scimitar has a dramatically curved edge designed
       for cutting and slashing. It is sometimes wider than a normal sheath can hold, and is
       more often hung from straps or some form of netting.

       Shillelagh: Unlike the standard club or cudgel, the shillelagh is a hand-carved or whittled
       shaft of wood about as long as a man’s arm with an off-centred knot of shaped wood at the
       end. The knot is sometimes heat-hardened and occasionally shaped into a beastly image or
       design.


 68
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                         2
         Shortspear: Heftier than a javelin and fitted with a broader head made for stabbing,
         a short spear is commonly used in conjunction with a phalanx of shields. The short
         spear has been proved time and again as one of the most versatile weapons in existence,
         though not necessarily the most powerful.

         Shortsword: The shortsword is a straight, broad-bladed sword designed for thrusting.
         It does carry an edge along its sides, but the edge is always secondary to the thrusting
         point.

         Stiletto: This is a thug or assassin’s choice of weapon. The stiletto is a small dagger
         with a very thin stabbing ‘blade’ which is actually more of a spike. It is easily hidden;
         granting a +15% bonus to Sleight Skill Tests to keep it concealed, and can puncture
         thin armour very easily.

         Tanto: The smallest of the folded metal blades, the tanto is slightly larger than a dagger
         and comes in curved or straight-bladed varieties. It has a sharply angled edge to the
         front, and is primarily a stabbing weapon – but is just as sharp as its larger cousins. It
         is traditionally a weapon used to dispatch a fallen foe or comrade, or even oneself. Just
         like its larger brethren, the tanto has all the benefits and drawbacks of folded metal
         blades, meaning that any target struck gains a +2 bonus to its non-natural Armour
         Points against tanto attacks.

         Target Shield: A medium sized, round shield made of wood and covered with hide. A
         target mounts a long spike on its central boss, making the shield a dangerous weapon,
         as well as being able to parry ranged weapons.

         Tetsubo: This Japanese weapon is attributed to large barbarians who once used sapling
         trees to make it, as it is amongst the largest of the bludgeoning implements carried by
         normal men. The tetsubo is a two metre long shaft of wood (or sometimes metal) that
         is thin and leather-wrapped at the haft. At the opposite end it is often as thick as a man’s
         leg, giving the whole weapon the appearance of a gigantic club. The entire length of the
         weapon is then covered in strips of studded metal running lengthwise from the top to
         the leather wrappings, adding weight and impact to the already huge weapon. Due to
         its size, the tetsubo has a –10% penalty to Parry attempts made by and against it.

         Tonfa: A simple baton with a crossbar, the wooden tonfa was originally used as a way
         to augment monastic fighting styles without endangering the monks’ holiness by using
         conventional weaponry. A tonfa can be spun rapidly around its crossbar, and can be
         used for attacking rapidly and without relent.

         Trident: Another tool turned weapon, a trident is a three-pronged or bladed spear
         that once was used to catch fish in the same way as a harpoon. If a trident impales, its
         barbed prongs do an extra one point of damage when being ripped free.

         Tulwar: This is a larger version of the scimitar, with a truly massive and imposing blade
         that requires two hands to heft and wield properly. It has a surprisingly small hilt for a
         weapon of its size, and is generally wielded in a ‘laced-fingers’ or ‘hand-over-hand’ style

                                                                                                        69
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                 2
       that makes it terribly difficult to do anything but attack– imposing a –10% penalty to
       all Parry attempts made with it.

       Wakazashi: A weapon of the Samurai, this is the ‘shortsword’ of the folded metal blades.
       A wakazashi is the traditional secondary weapon of folded metal sword duellists. It is
       not quite as long as a man’s arm, and has a slight curve to the blade that matches that
       of a katana or no-dachi. Using a wakazashi is often viewed as a less honourable resort,
       meaning that the wielder must have lost or broken his primary weapon if he draws the
       wakazashi at all. Like other weapons of its kind, the wakazashi has all the benefits and
       drawbacks of folded metal blades, meaning that any target struck gains a +2 bonus to
       its non-natural Armour Points against wakazashi attacks.

       War Gauntlet: The bigger and deadlier brother to the cestus, the war gauntlet is a fully
       plated gauntlet covered on all sides by sharp spikes and small blades and topped with a
       short row of longer blades or spikes. A single punch with a war gauntlet can ruin a large
       section of a target’s flesh – most notably the facial features. As with a cestus, the hand
       wielding the war gauntlet is all but useless, but its wielder is able to Parry normally.

       War Maul: Originally meant as a tool for splitting wood or breaking stones, the maul
       has a long history of use in warfare by peasants conscripted into service or oppressed
       into revolt. A maul is a large hammer with a wooden head, usually bound in metal
       bands to keep it from splintering. War mauls were originally intended for use on
       inanimate objects and may still be used on such objects without being destroyed.

       War Hammer: A weapon approximately the same size as a mace, the war hammer is
       frequently seen amongst Adventurers. Most war hammers are tipped with a hammer
       head and a metal spike, making them equally useful against flexible or stiff armour types.

       War Sword: The most common sword types available, the war sword is generally
       slightly less than a metre in length and possesses a sharpened tip to thrust with. It is the
       ubiquitous weapon of choice amongst many adventurers.

       Zweihänder: This is the larger, two-handed version of the flamberge. It has a very
       distinct shape to its blade, and always has two very long quillions sprouting to the
       sides of the hilt to make up for any difficulty the sword’s weight contributes to Parry
       attempts. Like its smaller brother, the specially designed blade ‘waves’ ring against other
       swords with a particularly odd vibration, making it difficult to hold a defence for long
       against a zweihänder wielder. Every time a sword parries a zweihänder, its Parry skill is
       reduced by –5% for the rest of the round.


       Close Combat Weapon Modifications
       The following is a list of modifications that a qualified weaponsmith could make to
       Close Combat weaponry. These modifications are not simple and generally take a
       great deal of time and money. There is always risk to the integrity of the weapon, and
       a single slip of the weaponsmith’s hand could mean a broken blade or weakened haft.

 70
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                          2
                               Close Combat Weapons
                               Weapon            Category   Damage Dice   STR/DEX   Size   Reach   Combat Manoeuvres          ENC   AP/HP   Cost
                               Archer’s Blade    1H         1D4           7/9       M      M       Bleed, Impale              1     4/6     75 SP
                               Awl Pike          2H         1D8+1         9/5       L      VL      Impale, Stand Fast         3     3/8     125 SP
                               Ball & chain      1H         1D6+1         9/11      M      M       Entangle, Stun Location    2     6/8     250 SP
                               Bastard sword     1H & 2H    1D8+1         13/9      M      M       Bleed, Impale              2     4/12    250 SP
                                                            1D10          9/9       M      M




Alex Greene (order #3215550)
                               Battleaxe         1H & 2H    1D6+1         11/9      M      M       Bleed, Sunder (2H only)    1     4/8     100 SP
                                                            1D8+1         9/9
                               Bill              2H         1D6+1         7/9       L      VL      Sunder                     2     2/8     50 SP
                               Broadsword        1H & 2H    1D8           14/9      M      M       Bleed, Impale              2     4/14    275 SP
                                                            1D8+1         11/9
                               Buckler           1H         1D3           –/5       M      S       -                          1     6/8     50 SP
                               Cestus            1H         1D3+1         9/9       S      T       Stun Location              1     5/6     65 SP
                               Chain             1H         1D4           7/12      M      M       Entangle                   1     8/6     10 SP
                               Chakram           1H         1D6+1         –/13      S      S       Bleed                      1     4/7     85 SP
                               Club              1H         1D6           7/–       M      S       Stun Location              1     4/4     5 SP
                               Cutlass           1H         1D6+1         6/7       M      M       Bleed, Impale              1     3/9     200 SP
                               Dagger            1H         1D4+1         –/–       S      S       Bleed, Impale              —     6/8     30 SP
                               Dart Blade        1H         1D2           –/–       S      S       -                          —     2/4     15 SP
                               Dirk              1H         1D3+2         –/–       S      S       Bleed, Impale              —     6/6     50 SP
                               Falchion          1H         1D6+2         7/9       M      M       Bleed                      1     6/10    200 SP
                               Fang shield       1H         1D6           10/9      L      S       Impale                     2     8/12    175 SP
                               Flamberge         1H         1D8           9/9       M      M       Bleed, Impale              2     4/10    300 SP
                               Gaff              1H         1D6           7/9       M      VL      Entangle                   2     2/8     25 SP
                               Gandasa                      2D6+1         12/9      H      L       Bleed, Sunder              4     3/12    155 SP
                               Garrotte          1H         1D2           –/9       S      T       -                          —     1/2     15 SP
                               Glaive            2H         1D8+1         7/9       M      L       Bleed                      3     4/10    100 SP
                               Great axe         2H         1D12+2        13/9      H      L       Bleed, Sunder              2     4/10    125 SP
                               Great club        2H         2D6           12/9      H      L       Stun Location              3     4/10    50 SP
                               Great hammer      2H         1D10+3        11/9      H      L       Stun Location, Sunder      3     4/10    250 SP
                               Great sword       2H         2D8           13/11     H      L       Bleed, Impale, Sunder      4     6/12    300 SP
                               Halberd           2H         1D8+2         7/7       L      VL      Entangle, Impale, Sunder   4     4/10    250 SP
                               Harpoon           1H         1D8           7/7       M      L       Impale                     2     2/7     35 SP




                        71
2
                        72
                               Weapon           Category   Damage Dice   STR/DEX   Size   Reach   Combat Manoeuvres           ENC   AP/HP   Cost
                               Hatchet          1H         1D6           –/9       S      S       Bleed                       1     3/6     25 SP
                               Heavy mace       1H & 2H    1D8+1         11/7      L      L       Stun Location, Sunder       3     6/10    200 SP
                                                           1D10+1        9/7
                               Heater Shield    1H         1D4           9/–       L      S       -                           2     6/12    150 SP
                               Hoplite Shield   1H         1D4           11/-      H      S       -                           3     6/18    300 SP
                               Iris             1H         1D4           –/9       S      S       Bleed                       —     4/3     65 SP
                               Katana           1H & 2H    1D10+1        11/10     M      M       Bleed, Impale               2     5/10    525 SP




Alex Greene (order #3215550)
                                                           1D12+1        9/9
                               Khopesh          1H         1D6+2         10/10     M      M       Bleed                       2     3/10    250 SP
                               Kite shield      1H         1D4           13/–      H      S       -                           3     4/18    300 SP
                               Knife            1H         1D3           –/–       S      S       Bleed, Impale               —     5/4     10 SP
                               Knuckledusters   1H         1D4           –/–       S      T       Stun Location               —     3/2     20 SP
                               Kris             1H         1D4+1         –/9       S      S       Impale                      —     3/6     200 SP
                               Kukri            1H         1D6           9/–       M      S       Bleed                       1     3/7     125 SP
                               Kunai            1H         1D3+1         –/7       S      S       Stun Location               —     4/4     25 SP
                               Lance            2H         1D10+2        9/9       H      VL      Impale, Sunder              3     4/10    150 SP
                               Light mace       1H         1D8           7/7       M      S       Stun Location               1     6/6     100 SP
                               Longspear        2H         1D10+1        5/5       L      VL      Impale                      2     4/10    30 SP
                               Longsword        1H & 2H    1D8           13/9      M      L       Bleed, Impale, Sunder (2H   2     6/12    250 SP
                                                           1D10          9/9       L      L       only)
                               Lucerne hammer   2H         1D10          12/7      L      L       Impale, Sunder              3     4/12    225 SP
                               Main Gauche      1H         1D4           –/11      S      S       Bleed                       —     6/7     180 SP
                               Mancatcher       2H         1D4           9/10      L      VL      Entangle, Grip              3     4/10    400 SP
                               Military flail   1H         1D10          13/11     L      L       Stun Location               3     4/10    250 SP
                               Military pick    1H         1D6+1         11/5      M      M       Stun Location, Sunder       3     6/10    180 SP
                               Moon Axe         2H         2D6           11/9      L      L       Bleed                       3     3/12    250 SP
                               Morningstar      2H         2D4           9/9       M      S       Stun Location               2     4/10    150 SP
                               Naginata         2H         2D8           11/7      L      VL      Bleed, Impale               3     4/12    300 SP

                               Net              1H         1D4           10/11     S      L       Entangle                    3     2/20    200 SP
                               Ninja-to         1H & 2H    1D6+2         10/9      M      M       Bleed, Impale               1     5/8     450 SP
                                                           1D8+1         7/9
                               No-Dachi         2H         2D8+1         12/10     H      L       Bleed, Impale               3     5/12    650 SP




2
                               Weapon          Category   Damage Dice   STR/DEX   Size   Reach   Combat Manoeuvres         ENC   AP/HP   Cost
                               Nunchaku        1H         1D4+1         7/13      M      S       Entangle, Stun Location   —     3/5     110 SP
                               Poleaxe         2H         1D8+2         11/9      L      L       Impale, Stun Location,    2     6/10    150 SP
                                                                                                 Sunder
                               Poniard         1H         1D4           –/7       S      S       Bleed, Impale             —     4/5     60 SP
                               Quarterstaff    2H         1D8           7/7       M      L       Stun Location             2     4/8     20 SP
                               Rapier          1H         1D8           7/13      M      L       Impale                    1     5/8     100 SP
                               Rondel          1H         1D4+2         –/–       S      S       Bleed                     —     3/6     40 SP




Alex Greene (order #3215550)
                               Sabre           1H         1D6+1         7/7       M      M       Bleed, Impale             1     6/8     225 SP
                               Sai             1H         1D4+1         –/9       S      M       Pin Weapon                1     3/8     125 SP
                               Scimitar        1H         1D8           7/11      M      M       Bleed                     2     6/10    200 SP
                               Shillelagh      1H         1D6+1         6/–       L      L       Stun Location             1     4/6     40 SP
                               Shortspear      1H         1D8+1         5/5       M      L       Impale                    2     4/5     20 SP
                               Shortsword      1H         1D6           5/7       M      S       Bleed, Impale             1     6/8     100 SP
                               Stiletto        1H         1D3+2         –/–       S      S       Impale                    —     4/3     75 SP
                               Tanto           1H         1D4+1         –/–       S      S       Bleed, Impale             —     5/5     250 SP
                               Target shield   1H         1D6           9/–       L      S       Impale                    2     4/12    150 SP
                               Tetsubo         2H         2D8           12/–      H      L       Stun Location             4     6/12    200 SP
                               Tonfa           1H         1D4+1         –/9       M      M       Stun Location             —     2/8     55 SP
                               Trident         1H         1D8           10/7      M      L       Impale                    2     4/10    155 SP
                               Tulwar          2H         2D6           9/7       L      L       Bleed, Sunder             3     4/14    300 SP
                               Wakazashi       1H         1D8           –/9       S      S       Bleed, Impale             1     5/8     425 SP
                               War gauntlet    1H         1D4+1         10/9      S      T       Stun Location             1     6/8     125 SP
                               War maul        2H         2D6           13/7      H      L       Stun Location             3     3/12    150 SP
                               War hammer      2H         1D8+1         11/9      M      M       Stun Location             2     3/8     150 SP
                               War sword       1H         1D8           9/7       M      M       Bleed, Impale             2     6/10    175 SP
                               Zweihänder      2H         2D6+1         12/11     H      L       Bleed, Impale, Sunder     3     6/12    475 SP




                        73
2
       The Close Combat Weapon Modifications table shows the names of these
       modifications, how long they typically take, what sort of weapons may be modified
       (at the Games Master’s discretion), the difficulty of the modification and the cost. A
       detailed description of each modification and an example of how it would look and
       affect a given weapon follows.

       Banded: By riveting overlapping metal bands to the portion of the weapon that smashes
       into an opponent, the weaponsmith adds more force to the blow. This process also
       makes the weapon more durable, if also heavier. The weapon adds +1 to its damage,
       ENC and HP.

       Example: A newly Banded Target Shield inflicts 1D6+1 damage, has an ENC score of 3
       and an AP/HP of 8/13.

       Collapsible: This invasive modification actually cuts the weapon into a number of
       pieces equal to its ENC, and places spiral-threading and pin-joints where the pieces
       must be attached. This allows the weapon to be far more easily concealed or smuggled
       in pieces but then assembled when needed in one minute per weapon section. This
       modification makes the weapon itself easier to damage at these joints, reducing both
       the weapon’s Armour Points and Hit Points by one each, to a minimum of one.

       Example: A Collapsible Great Axe would break into two pieces (likely haft and head),
       taking two minutes to assemble or dissemble, and would have a modified AP/HP of 3/9
       when assembled.

       Envenomed: A weapon can be modified to carry a number of doses of any poison or
       toxin equal to the weapon’s ENC by drilling small rough-edged pockets in the damaging
       portion of the weapon. This not only makes the weapon far deadlier, depending on
       what the user wishes to place in the poison-pockets, but it also significantly weakens

       Close Combat Weapon Modifications
                      Average Time of
       Modification   Modification      Weapon Groups Available          Difficulty   Cost
       Banded         2D2 days          Flail, Hammer, Shield            –10%         200 SP
       Collapsible    2D6 days          Axe, Hammer, Polearm, Spear      –15%         350 SP
       Envenomed      1D8 hours         Axe, Dagger, Polearm, Spear,     –10%         500 SP
                                        Sword, Unarmed
       Hooked         2D2 days          Axe, Dagger, Flail, Hammer,      –10%         200 SP
                                        Polearm, Shield, Spear, Sword,
                                        Unarmed
       Lightened      1D4 days          Anything 2 ENC or more           –25%         250 SP
       Reinforced     2D6 hours         All Weapons                      –5%          100 SP
       Serrated       2D8 hours         Axe, Dagger, Polearm, Spear,     –15%         300 SP
                                        Sword
       Spiked         2D2 days          Axe, Dagger, Flail, Hammer,      –10%         200 SP
                                        Polearm, Shield, Spear, Sword,
                                        Unarmed

 74
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                    2
         the blade – reducing the weapon’s Armour Points and Hit Points by 2, to a minimum
         of 1.

         Example: An Envenomed Ninja-to would be able to carry one dose of the user’s poisons but
         would have an adjusted AP/HP of 3/6.

         Hooked: Riveting or forge-welding a hook or set of hooks on the backside of any
         bladed weapon can make it a very cruel implement. Although it slows the weapon’s
         initial attack down considerably, reducing all attack rolls by –5% and initial damage by
         –1 (to a minimum of one), it can cause considerable tissue damage if it is ever ripped
         outward from a deep wound. This modification is only useful on weapons capable of
         Impaling a target, but causes an additional die of damage (of the same type) if it is
         Yanked free of an impaling wound.

         Example: A Hooked Trident suffers a –5% to its attack rolls due to the large barbs on its
         prongs and only inflicts 1D8–1 damage, but inflicts 2D8–1 damage when Yanked free from
         an Impaled target!

         Lightened: By drilling, cutting or sanding out areas of the weapon considered to be
         ‘non-essential’, the weaponsmith can reduce the weight of the weapon considerably.
         This makes the weapon lighter and easier to wield and carry effectively but weakens
         the weapon overall. The weapon can reduce its ENC score by one and adds +5% to
         all attack rolls. However, both its Armour Points and Hit Points are reduced by 2, to
         a minimum of 1.

         Example: A Lightened Greatsword would weigh only an ENC of 3 and swing with a +10%
         bonus to attack but only has an AP/HP of 4/10.

         Reinforced: By adding plates, rings, bands or straps of metal and leather to the high-
         stress areas of a weapon, the weaponsmith makes it far more durable and able to
         withstand the rigours of being an Adventurer’s weapon. This adds 2 to the Armour
         Points and 3 to the Hit Points of the weapon, but +1 to its ENC score. This new weight
         slows reaction time, imposing a –5% penalty to all Parry tests made with the weapon.

         Example: A Reinforced Lance has a mighty 6/13 in its Armour Points and Hit Points
         respectively but suffers the –5% penalty to Parry attempts, and weighs a hefty 4 ENC.

         Serrated: A modification generally sought by only the truly sadistic, angled ‘teeth’ can
         be added to the blade of a weapon. This new and savage edge bites and saws into a
         target as much as it cuts or stabs, inflicting terrible wounds. This modification not only
         adds +1 to the damage it inflicts, but also causes any mundane healing skill attempts
         on the wound suffer a –15% penalty. The serrated teeth do remove the weapon’s
         integrity, reducing its Armour Points by one, to a minimum of one. These teeth are
         also much easier to catch and parry away, granting enemy Parry attempts against it a
         +10% bonus.



                                                                                                      75
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                               2
       Example: A truly wicked weapon, a Serrated shortsword inflicts 1D6+1 damage that cannot
       be healed easily (–15 penalty) but can be parried +10% easier and only has an AP of 3
       instead of its normal 4.

       Spiked: Adding spikes to a weapon, even one that normally has spikes on it, can add
       some significant damage potential to its attacks. Adding all of these extra pointy objects
       to a weapon makes it heavier and easier to catch with a parrying blade but also makes
       it a little more difficult for the wielder to avoid getting stuck! The modification adds
       +2 to the damage of the weapon but adds +1 to its ENC and DEX requirement. Also,
       enemies parrying the spiked weapon will have a +5% bonus to their roll.

       Example: A Spiked Glaive will inflict a mighty 1D8+3 damage but will weigh 4 ENC and
       require a DEX of 10 to wield it properly. With the +5% bonus enemies receive to parry it,
       its wielder may find it hard to land those deadly spiked blows.


       The Weapon Modification Process
       A weaponsmith making modifications to a weapon must spend the allotted time
       doing the work in a proper forge or workshop, and suffers severe penalties for trying
       to make modifications outside of such environments (–20 to –50% commonly). Once
       the time has been spent doing the work, the weaponsmith makes the adjusted Craft
       (Weaponsmith) Skill Test. The outcomes of possible results of that Skill Test are below.

       Critical Success: The weapon can ignore any one of the penalties described in the modification
       descriptions (Games Master’s choice).

       Success: The modification is complete and all the bonuses and penalties described are
       applied.

       Failure: The modification is harder than first thought. The weapon suffers one Hit Point
       of damage (beyond Armour Points) and the modification process must be repeated.

       Fumble: The modification was too invasive and the weapon suffered massively in its
       failing, losing one Armour Point and one 1D4 Hit Points immediately. If this brings
       either of those statistics to zero, the weapon is broken and unsalvageable. No further
       attempts to modify the weapon can be made.

       No weapon can have more than one modification at a time. This does not mean that a
       weapon cannot be modified multiple times; it merely means that the last modification
       performed takes precedence over all of the others. One thing to remember when
       performing modifications over other modifications: all negative modifiers to Armour
       Points and Hit Points are permanent and cumulative, whilst new modification bonuses
       replace old ones.




 76
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                            2
         Ranged Combat Weapons
         As with Close Combat weapons, ranged weapons are defined by a common series of
         characteristics.

         Damage Dice: The damage the weapon deals on a successful attack.

         Range: This is the effective range of the weapon. The maximum range a weapon can
         be fired or thrown is twice this score.

         Load: This shows how many Combat Actions are required to load or reload the
         weapon.

         STR/DEX: The minimum STR and DEX scores needed to easily wield this weapon.
         For every point a Characteristic is below these minimums, a –5% penalty is applied to
         an Adventurer’s skill when attacking with this weapon.

         Size: Each ranged weapon possesses a size rating. In the case of projectile weapons, this
         does not relate to the firing weapon itself, but rather to how ‘forceful’ its ammunition
         is. The value is used to determine whether the weapon can overcome any shield which
         may parry it. The size categories are Small (S), Medium (M), Large (L), Huge (H) and
         Enormous (E).

         Combat Manoeuvres: Any specific Combat Manoeuvres applicable to the weapon or
         its ammunition.

         ENC: The weight and bulk of the weapon. See the Legend Core Rulebook for more
         details on Encumbrance and its effects on Adventurers.

         AP/HP: The armour points and Hit Points possessed by the weapon. When Hit Points
         reach 0, the weapon is broken and useless.

         Cost: The average cost in Silver Pieces to purchase this weapon.


         Ranged Weapon Descriptions
         Arbalest: This is a metal-armed crossbow that when stood on its end is as tall as a man.
         It fires specially crafted arbalest bolts that have been reinforced in order to withstand
         the sheer force that its braided cord propels them at. Able to drive a finger-thick bolt a
         full hand’s depth into an oak tree, the arbalest hits with force enough to punch through
         armour as if it were thin cloth. An Adventurer’s Damage Modifier is never applied
         when he is using an arbalest.

         Atlatl: A simple rope-based mechanical device used to further the range and hitting power
         of javelins, the atlatl takes time to load but its effects can be quite spectacular. Only javelins
         may used with an atlatl. There is a very simple version of the device made from a wooden
         shaft that has a cupped end in which to fling a javelin, but it is far inferior to the rope-based
         versions (and only adds +1 damage).
                                                                                                              77
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                       2
       Blowgun: This is a hollow tube or pipe, usually made of wood or bone, which expels a
       dart when its user blows on one end. As the dart itself is capable of little damage, blowguns
       are seldom used without some kind of poison. An Adventurer’s Damage Modifier is never
       applied when he is using a blowgun, which is best used for precision attacks.

       Bola: With two heavy weights at the opposite ends of a braid of leather cord or even
       light chain, the bola is a weapon primarily designed to entangle and bring down a
       target rather than kill it.

       Boomerang: This specially carved piece of wood with a slight bend in its middle is
       designed spin along the ground towards its target when thrown, it will not return to the
       thrower whether it hits or misses. With a simple flick of the wrist the boomerang spins
       toward its target, connecting with surprising force. The boomerang is also designed to
       be used as a club.

       Chakram: See entry in Close Combat Weapons on page 61.

       Dart: A dart resembles an arrow with a longer head and shorter shaft (usually slightly
       less than half a metre in length). Darts are rarely a warrior’s weapon and are found in
       the hands of small game huntsmen and roguish Adventurers.

       Dart Blade: See entry in Close Combat Weapons on page 62.

       Discus: A discus is a flat disc made of clay or wood rimmed with a hard metal ring.
       Hurling the discus is an old sport and show of physical prowess. However, someone
       who is good enough with a discus could easily split skin and shatter bone with a
       forceful throw. Aerodynamic as it is, a discus used to attack a target outside of its
       effective range only suffers a –25% penalty (or halves the skill if under 50%).

       Flatbow: A flatbow is a bow made from a single plank of supple wood, likely ash or
       maple, and lashed with a rather stout bowstring. Similar in size to a shortbow, the
       flatbow requires less STR to fire but also cannot launch an arrow nearly as far as its
       larger, curved cousins.

       Heavy Crossbow: Similar in concept to the light crossbow, this version is larger and
       reinforced with metal bands to handle the immense pull of the string. Many heavy
       crossbows come with a metal stirrup so the firer can use his foot for leverage or a crank
       to pull back the thick string. An Adventurer’s Damage Modifier is never applied when
       he is using a heavy crossbow.

       Horse Bow: This is a bow designed specifically for the archer who rarely leaves his saddle.
       Longer on the top half than the lower, its gentle curve allows for remarkably direct shots
       even when being bounced around on the back of a steed. Despite its strange design, a horse
       bow can be fired without penalty from on foot as well as mounted.

       Hurling Sphere: One of the simplest ranged weapons, a hurling sphere is a hollowed
       ball of metal or stone filled with sand or lead. The thrower should clasp the sphere in

 78
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                           2
         both hands and hurl it overhead like a catapult, bringing its weight down on the target
         with crushing force.

         Javelin: The javelin is a light spear-like weapon with a smooth-bored head designed for
         throwing short distances.

         Kunai: See entry in Close Combat Weapons on page 65.

         Light Crossbow: A simple mechanical bow, the light crossbow often sees service in
         small armies that lack training in other types of ranged weapons. It can be clutched
         in one hand and reloaded with the other, making it a good infantryman’s weapon. An
         Adventurer’s Damage Modifier is never applied when he is using a light crossbow.

         Long Bow: A long bow has a shaft as much as two metres in length, and is designed
         to be fired on foot. A long bow cannot be used from horseback and is one of the most
         feared ranged weapons of the battlefield.

         Moon Bow: An odd-looking bow with a curve so dramatic that it nearly looks like a
         crescent moon, the moon bow’s arms almost come together and touch when firing.
         Although the bow requires a surprising amount of control to prevent the ‘closed circle’
         from bothering the firer’s aim or balance, it can project an arrow with surprising force
         at a modest range.

         Net: See entry in Close Combat Weapons on page 67.

         Nomad Bow: A nomad bow is shorter than the long bow and sacrifices some range and
         power in exchange for portability. It is very popular amongst Adventurers who live on
         the road and often without mount, as the nomad bow can be worn over the shoulder
         comfortably.

         Petals: What look like small sharpened coins or ovals made of metal, petals are easily
         concealable throwing weapons. Petals that are stored in a coin purse or tucked into a
         false pocket are almost impossible to detect. In fact, some coin-laden Adventurers might
         throw a handful of petals in their coffers or coin pouches just to deter pickpockets or
         thieves who are in for a painful surprise, should they grab a fistful of coins with a petal
         or two tucked in!

         Recurve Bow: A recurve bow has forward-angled arms that are strung almost a hand’s
         span in front of the bracing grip; the arms come down together when pulled back.
         Recurve bows are known to be able to punch right through plate armour but can be
         outranged by nomad bows quite easily.

         Short Bow: Designed to be fired from horseback, the short bow is equally useful as
         a footsoldier’s weapon. It is a good hunting tool as well as a weapon of war and when
         used to hunt deer and smaller game animals it can make all the difference.



                                                                                                       79
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                2
       Sling: A sling is a long strip of cloth or leather used to fling a stone or bullet at a target.
       It was originally a bird-hunter’s tool of choice. Many slings also have a sewn-in leather
       cup or pad in which to hold the projectile while gathering velocity. A sling’s silence and
       relative accuracy in the hands of a skilled user also makes it a useful tool for rogues and
       other shady characters.

       Spike: Another basic throwing weapon, the throwing spike is a thin, rod-like piece of
       metal or wood, about as long as a man’s hand, sharpened at one end. With a flick of the
       wrist and elbow the user can send one of these spikes flying toward a target. Throwing
       spikes are a favourite of assassins and bandits for their ability to be concealed in plain
       sight. Tucked or otherwise put away, onlookers have a –50% to their Perception skill in
       order to locate any set of three or fewer spikes hidden in one place.

       Staff Sling: A simple sling mounted on the end of a wooden haft, the staff sling can be
       spun in wide circles, which generates greater force for throwing. When not being used
       as a sling, the leather cup and cord can be wound around the haft and lashed down,
       effectively turning the staff sling into a quarterstaff.

       Throwing Star: Also traditionally called ‘shuriken’, these are light pieces of metal with
       three or more razor sharp points. Throwing stars are a favourite of certain types of
       assassins for delivering deadly poisons, but to do so the thrower must take a –10%
       Throwing penalty or risk poisoning himself on the deadly edges.

       Trident: See entry in Close Combat Weapons on page 69.

       Whip Bow: Named for its resemblance to a coachman’s whip, the whip bow is a very
       flexible piece of wood with a shortened bowstring tied to only one of its ends. The string
       has a small loop at the end, which is placed on specially notched arrows before pulling
       backwards. The flexible shaft bends almost in half before the user should let go of the
       arrow, which hurls forward similar to a catapult.

       Wrist Bow: A delicate and compact version of the light crossbow, the aptly named
       wrist crossbow has very short arms and can be worn under a billowing or loose sleeve.
       It is commonly worn on the ‘good hand’ of the firer, meaning that his off-hand must be
       used to quickly reload the weapon. Although the wrist bow is small it can still restrict
       movement, and using any sort of melee weapon in the hand with the wrist crossbow
       lashed to it causes a –10% penalty to both attack and Parry Skill Tests.


       Ranged Weapon Ammunition
       The table on page 83 lists specific types of ammunition, how sturdy they might be,
       whether they weigh enough to have an ENC score and their cost. Please note that
       unless an entry has a number after its name, the price listed is for a single item.

       Arbalest bolts: Made of metal-shod hardwood roughly as thick as a man’s thumb,
       arbalest bolts are tipped with heavy metal heads that resemble a stiletto or dagger. They
       use small fletching from waxy-feathered fowl and are remarkably accurate, if only due
       to the sheer force with which they are fired.
 80
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                             2
                               Ranged Weapons
                                                         Damage
                               Weapon           Damage   Modifier   Range   Load   STR/DEX   Size   Combat Manoeuvres             ENC   AP/HP   Cost
                               Arbalest         1D12     N          180m    4      10/9      E      Impale, Sunder                3     6/10    500 SP
                               Atlatl           +2       Y          +10m    2      5/11      L      Impale                        1     2/4     20 SP
                               Blowgun           —       N          15m     1      –/9       —      Impale                        —     1/4     30 SP




Alex Greene (order #3215550)
                               Bolas            1D4      Y          15m     —      –/9       —      Entangle                       —    2/2     10 SP
                               Boomerang        1D3+2    Y          50m     —      5/11      —      Stun Location                 —     2/4     25 SP
                               Chakram          1D6      Y          30m     —      –/13      S      —                             1     4/7     85 SP
                               Dagger           1D4      Y          10m     —      –/9       S      Impale                        —     4/6     30 SP
                               Dart             1D4      Y          20m     —      –/9       S      Impale                        —     2/1     10 SP
                               Dart blade       1D2      Y          15m     —      –/–       S      Impale                        —     2/4     15 SP
                               Discus           1D4+1    Y          50m     —      –/9       L      Stun Location                 —     2/3     30 SP
                               Flatbow          1D8      N          40m     1      8/9       L      Impale                        1     3/4     65 SP
                               Hatchet          1D6      Y          10m     —      7/11      S      Bleed                         1     4/6     25 SP
                               Heavy crossbow   1D10     N          150m    3      7/9       H      Impale, Sunder                2     4/8     350 SP
                               Horse bow        1D8+1    Y          100m    1      10/12     M      Impale                        1     4/6     185 SP
                               Hurling sphere   2D3      Y          10m     —      13/–      S      —                             1     4/6     30 SP
                               Javelin          1D8      Y          30m     —      5/9       H      Impale, Pin Weapon (Shield)   1     3/8     20 SP
                               Kunai            1D3+1    Y          15m     —      –/7       M      Impale                        —     4/4     25 SP
                               Light crossbow   1D8      N          100m    2      5/9       L      Impale                        1     4/5     150 SP
                               Long bow         1D8      Y          175m    1      13/11     H      Impale                        1     4/7     200 SP
                               Moon bow         1D10     Y          100m    1      11/12     H      Impale                        1     2/6     175 SP
                               Net               —       N          2.5m    —      10/11     —      Entangle                      3     2/20    200 SP
                               Nomad bow        1D6+1    Y          120m    1      11/11     L      Impale                        1     4/5     150 SP
                               Petals           1D3      Y          10m     —      –/12      –      Impale                        —     2/2     20 SP
                               Recurve bow      1D8      Y          175m    1      13/11     H      Impale                        1     4/8     225 SP




                        81
2
                                               Arrows: Arrows are the most commonly used
                                               ammunition in Legend. While not as simple to




                              155 SP

                              175 SP
                              75 SP
                              20 SP

                              15 SP
                              20 SP
                              15 SP

                              50 SP
                                               make as sling bullets, they are far more popular
          Cost



                              5 SP
                                               for their multiple utilities.
          AP/HP




                                               Arrow, Fishing: More of a tool than a weapon,


                              4/10
                              4/4
                              4/5
                              1/2
                              4/2
                              3/6
                              4/1

                              4/4
                              3/4
                                               the fishing arrow is a thin-headed arrow that
                                               has a set of three small barbs facing backwards
                                               to catch and hold a wriggling fish. It also has
          ENC



                              —
                              —

                              —



                              —
                                               almost no fletching at all (it interferes with
                              1
                              2



                              2

                              2
                              1
                                               underwater propulsion) but rather a small
                                               metal ring onto which cord or twine can be
                                               tied to retrieve a shot fish. Using fishing arrows
          Combat Manoeuvres




                                               to catch fish grants a +10% bonus to Survival
                                               Skill Tests.
                              Stun Location

                              Stun Location




                                               Arrow, Lotus-blossom: A true work of artistry
                              Impale
                              Impale

                              Impale



                              Impale
                              Impale
                              Impale




                                               by the same crafters who patiently make folded
                              Bleed




                                               metal blades, the lotus-blossom arrow is a
                                               cluster of small, thin folded metal chips rooted
                                               to one point at the tip of an arrow. While not
          Size


                              M

                              M




                              M




                                               as stable in flight as regular arrows due to the
                              H
                              L

                              L




                              L
                              L
                              S




                                               wind-drag upon the clustered-head (imposing
          STR/DEX




                                               a –10% penalty to hit), this vaguely flower-
                                               shaped group of blades shred flesh to ribbons
                              9/11

                              –/11

                              –/11
                              –/13
                              10/7

                              5/11




                                               upon impact, giving a +2 bonus to damage.
                              5/9

                              –/9




                              5/9




                                               Arrow, Moon-blade: One of the more awkward-
          Load


                              —

                              —

                              —
                              —




                                               looking arrowheads, moon-blade arrows have
                              1

                              1

                              3



                              1
                              1




                                               crescent-shaped blades that are slightly bevelled
                                               on each side to make the arrows spin rapidly
          Range



                              200m

                              100m
                              80m
                              25m

                              10m

                              15m
                              10m
                              30m
                              50m




                                               in flight. This does very little to the range of
                                               the arrow or its damage potential but does
                                               give it a broader surface in which it cuts. This
      Modifier
      Damage




                                               makes it far easier for the arrow to cut through
                                               cloth, rope, leather and other flexible materials.
                              N
                              Y
                              Y
                              Y
                              Y
                              Y
                              Y
                              Y
                              Y




                                               Moon-blade arrows ignore half the Armour
          Damage




                                               Point rating of any flexible material they hit, at
                              1D8+1




                              1D6+2
                              1D4+1




                                               the Games Master’s discretion.
                              1D6

                              1D8
                              1D4
                              2D6
                              1D4
                              1D8




                                               Arrow, Signal: Not made for combat at all,
                                               signal arrows have a hollow head bored out in
                                               the same fashion as a shrilling whistle. When
                              Wrist Crossbow
                              Throwing star




                                               fired (preferably upward into the air) the arrow
                              Whip bow
                              Shortspear
                              Short bow




                              Staff sling




                                               corkscrews and emits a distinct and piercing wail
          Weapon




                              Trident




                                               that can be heard on a clear day for up to five
                              Spike
                              Sling




                                               kilometres. If actually fired at a target, the arrow
 82
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                          2
         has a –35% penalty to hit and will Ranged Weapon Ammunition
         cause half damage if the attack is Ammunition            AP/HP ENC Cost
         successful.                        Arbalest Bolts (10)   1/2   1   5 SP
                                               Arrows (10)                   1/1     —      1 SP
         Arrow, Wood-headed: Carved Arrow, Fishing                         1/2  —   2 CP
         fully from oak, mahogany, teak Arrow, Lotus-blossom               1/2  —   2 SP
         or even ebony, ‘wood-headed’ is Arrow, Moon-blade                 1/2  —   6 CP
         actually a misnomer as the entire Arrow, Signal                   1/1  —   3 CP
         arrow is carved carefully from the Arrow, Wood-headed             1/1  —   2 CP
         same piece of wood. While this Blowgun Darts (10)                 1/1  —   2 SP
         does absolutely nothing for the
                                             Blowgun Darts, Barbed (5)     1/1  —   2 SP
         integrity or stability of the arrow
                                             Blowgun Marking Wads (20)     0/1  —   1 SP
         itself, it does mean that the arrow
                                             Crossbow Bolts (10)           1/1  —   2 SP
         no longer bears any metal at all.
                                             Crossbow Bolt, Barbed         1/1  —   6 CP
         This is only a consideration for
                                             Crossbow Bolt, Metal-core     2/2  —   1 SP
         those who may have some kind
                                             Crossbow Bolt, Wood-headed 1/1     —   3 CP
         of religious belief against the use
         of metal or forged weaponry or      Heavy  Crossbow    Bolt, Bola 2/10 1   5 SP
         those who must use things ‘of       Sling Bullets (10)            1/1  —   5 CP
         the land’. Also, in some Legend     Whip  Bow   Arrows  (10)      1/1  —   2 SP
         worlds there are creatures that can
         only be harmed or perhaps harmed especially, by wooden objects. All Armour Points
         are considered one point higher than normal against wood-headed arrows (though a
         creature with 0 AP does not gain this bonus).

         Blowgun Darts: Blowgun darts are small, thin needles or stubby miniature arrowheads
         that often have a tuft of down or cotton at the end in order to catch the rush of air in
         a blowgun. They are not designed to do much in the way of damage, but can deliver
         a single dose of poison to a target quite easily – if the firer can manage to bypass his
         armour, of course.

         Blowgun Darts, Barbed: Although no more damaging than regular darts, barbed
         darts stick in any wound that they roll their maximum amount of damage for. These
         darts, while imbedded, penalise all Skill Tests by –5% per dart, and inflict an additional
         point of damage when a Combat Action is taken to remove them (without the proper
         First Aid test).

         Blowgun Marking Wads: Used by trackers, marking wads are small pellets of sawdust
         or wool that have been soaked in dye or heavily scented oil and allowed to dry enough
         to be fired. They do not fly very well, halving the effective range of the blowgun, and
         inflict no damage when they hit. However, anyone struck will bear a small (maybe
         three or four centimetres in diameter) splatter of the marking substance. The dye
         can be easily seen if an Adventurer knows what to look for and musk oils or scented
         marking fluids can be traced via smell extremely easily (especially if tracking animals
         are involved). The dye adds +10% to Perception tests against the marked target and the
         scented oil adds +25% to Tracking rolls to find the target by scent. The fluids from a
         marking wad remain on the target for 1D3 days or until thoroughly washed with lye.

                                                                                                      83
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                               2
       Crossbow Bolts: Simple and stout, bolts are miniature arrows with smaller fletching
       designed to carry the bolt on existing force rather than keep it aloft. They tend to have
       thinner, more compact heads of metal on them to drive deeper with the impact but
       some have the wider hunting heads commonly seen on arrows. Bolts tend to be thicker
       than arrows and are purchased to fit a specific type of crossbow – wrist, light, medium
       or heavy.

       Crossbow Bolt, Barbed: See the entry on barbed arrows for details on this item, as the
       two function exactly the same.

       Crossbow Bolt, Metal-core: Heavier and shorter-ranged than a common crossbow
       bolt, metal-core bolts have a thin rod of metal drilled through their centres – giving
       them far more impact force when they strike a resilient target. Metal-core bolts reduce
       the crossbow’s effective range by one-third (round fractions up) but ignore the first
       three points of AP a target has from non-magical armour.

       Crossbow Bolt, Wood-headed: See the entry on wood-headed arrow for details on
       this item, as the two function exactly the same.

       Heavy Crossbow Bolt, Bola: A specially crafted bolt that is fitted to the end of a
       heavy crossbow, the bola bolt has actually two iron balls for heads. When fired, the
       lightweight shaft falls away as the heavy balls catch the rush of air and begin to separate
       and spin. This shot reduces the effective range of a heavy crossbow to 75 metres and
       does not use the damage statistics of the crossbow at all. Instead, this shot operates in
       the same manner as a thrown bola and has the additional range of the crossbow. Due
       to the weapon’s construction and the specific mechanics used in order to fire, loading a
       bola bolt takes an additional two Combat Actions.

       Sling Bullets: Stone or lead ovals that can reach surprising speeds and accuracy when
       hurled by a skilled user. Bullets can be retrieved rather easily and most can even be
       hammered or rolled back into a usable shape with little effort (as lead becomes soft
       when heated slightly).

       Whip Bow Arrows: These are a cross between crossbow bolts and true arrows. They
       are shorter and broader so as to be held between the fingers when pulling back a whip
       bow. They also have a short metal hook below their heads to hold the whip bow’s string
       loop. They are generally viewed as more of a bolt than an arrow, and some fletchers
       might call them by an alternate name: ‘whip darts’.


       Alternate Weapon Materials
       The following table shows a variety of alternate materials that have different effects
       upon weaponry. The table shows the material, the modifier to Craft Skill Tests when
       trying to make the weapon and the suggested cost modifier involved. Further details are
       included in the materials descriptions. It should be noted that some of these materials
       may not be available in all cultures, game settings or campaigns but this is ultimately
       up to the Games Master.
 84
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                         2
         Alternate Weapon Materials                      Bone: Lengths of bone have been carved
         Alternate   Craft skill                         into sharp weapons in various cultures
         Material    Modifier      Cost Modifier         for centuries and some still believe these
         Bone        +10%          –50%                  weapons are just as effective in present
         Coral       –15%          x2                    times. Chipped, sanded and ground into
         Gold        –10%          x12                   the shape of the weapon in question,
         Steel       –10%          x4                    bone is best suited as a bladed or piercing
         Stone       +15%          –75% (and have        weapon – but a good stout bone club or
                                   materials on hand1)   maul can do almost as much damage as
         Wondrous    –75%          x20 (and have         a wooden one!
         Material                  materials on hand1)

                                                         Weapons made from bone inflict –1
         1
          It is up to the Games Master to decide
                                                         damage from their porous edges or heft,
         how much of a substance is enough to
                                                         and reduce their AP by 1.
         craft the weapon in question.
                                                           Coral: Weaponsmiths that manage to
         shape or chip coral into a good piercing or slashing weapon will find the new material
         tears, as opposed to slices, the flesh of the enemy. Wounds left by coral weapons become
         easily infected and are terribly difficult to heal by normal means. Coral is rather heavy,
         much like stone, and becomes even more so when wet.

         Coral weaponry with a blade or piercing spike inflict +1 damage, and any First Aid
         attempts upon inflicted wounds are penalised by –10%. The extra weight reflects a
         +1 ENC, which is raised to +3 ENC whenever significantly wet (due to heavy rain,
         submersion and so on).

         Gold: Soft as far as metals go, gold is not the first material chosen to craft weaponry.
         However, its very existence symbolises wealth and nobility. It is very costly to make any
         sort of weapon out of gold, with most weaponsmiths seeing the use of gold in such a
         way as an utter waste of good resources that could be spent elsewhere.

         Gold weaponry suffers –1 to damage and Armour Points, and a –3 to Hit Points (to a
         minimum of one). Its ENC score is also doubled, and +1 is added to the STR necessary
         to wield it due to the denseness of the precious metal. As a sign of wealth, anyone
         wielding a golden weapon can add +10% to his Influence skill.

         Steel: The alloy of iron ore and carbon, steel is light and hard – making it the perfect
         metal for weaponry. It holds an edge when sharpened for a very long time, resists
         denting and nicking from common use and is able to cut through most common
         armour with relative ease. Essentially, a culture that can make steel weaponry will have
         a definite advantage over all those who cannot.

         Steel weaponry adds +2 to its Armour Points and +4 to its Hit Points while reducing its
         ENC by 1. Superior to bronze and common irons in nearly every way, steel weaponry
         is only available to cultures that have managed to discover the process to actually mix
         and create the metal.


                                                                                                       85
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                2
       Stone: Heavy and unable to hold a decent edge for more than a few strikes, stone
       weaponry can vary from a piece of granite lashed to a branch to a fine sliver of chipped
       obsidian in the shape of a stiletto. Although simple and rather primitive; stone can be
       quite effective as a weapon if the wielder is strong enough to use it.

       Stone weapons add +1 to their Armour Points and +3 Hit Points, +2 to the STR required
       to wield them and doubles their ENC score.

       Wondrous Material: In the many lands of Legend, there are mythic materials as durable
       as a dragon’s scale, light as a feather and as sharp as the edge of a razor. These are all
       collectively classified as ‘wondrous material’.

       Exactly what weaponry might be made from wondrous material is entirely up to the
       Games Master. It should be legendary, with blades able to cut through any mortal
       substance and maces that cause the ground to shake. Should a Games Master decide to
       add wondrous material to his campaign, it is up to him to decide its capabilities.


       Black Powder Weapons
       Often discovered by accident when an alchemist combines sulphur, charcoal and
       saltpetre, black powder is a leap in technology that changes worlds. Extremely volatile
       and flammable, the substance is a grainy grey-black concoction that burns rapidly when
       set to spark or flame or explodes violently when packed tightly and lit somehow.

       The following weapons and devices can be invented, crafted and used by Adventurers
       with access to the black powder. With the exception of the thrown weaponry, all of the
       following weapons require a special Ranged Combat Weapon Skill – Black Powder –
       in order to operate successfully. Also, any weapon with a Load time listed additionally
       requires an unmodified Craft (Gunsmithing) or Mechanisms Skill Test with the listed
       bonus/penalty.

       Arquebus: A smaller version of the musket with a shorter stock and an easier barrel to swab
       and re-pack, the arquebus is a powerful, two-handed rifle that can rip into armoured targets
       with ease. It is best used as a one-shot weapon due to its lengthy reload time, and many who
       use it attach a dagger or shortsword to its end to serve as a bayonet for when the enemy closes
       – should he survive the shot from the weapon.

       Blunderbuss: This is one of the simplest forms of a black powder firearm, where a
       packing cup of powder is burned in order to propel small pebbles, shot and other
       scrap from the weapon’s wide-barrel. The resulting explosion hurls the loose shot into
       a cloud of deadly projectiles. While these projectiles may not have much in the way of
       penetration, they are very difficult to avoid and spread their damage out over multiple
       sections of a target. Anyone targeted by a blunderbuss not only has a –10% to their
       Evade skill against the attack, but the damage rolled will be divided evenly (round
       fractions up) amongst 1D4+1 Hit Locations .


 86
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                             2
         Bomb, Hand: A simple clay shell or metal sphere packed with black powder and
         fragments of shrapnel, a fuse, and capped in wax, the hand bomb is a deadly and
         dangerous device. After lighting the fuse the hand bomb then has 1D3 turns (rolled
         secretly by the Games Master) before it will explode on the same Strike Rank as it was
         lit, inflicting its damage to all targets within five metres. This damage is divided evenly
         between all body locations of a target (or body locations within the area of effect in
         the case of larger targets), deducting the AP from damage to each location. Should the
         user Fumble his Throwing Skill Test, he drops the bomb at his feet where it explodes
         normally after the fuse burns its allotted time.

         Bomb, Projectile: A larger version of the hand bomb, a projectile bomb is too heavy
         to be thrown (without a STR of 25 or more) and must be launched from a catapult,
         trebuchet or other propulsion device. It has all the same rules as a hand bomb, save
         for the fact that its fuse is designed to burn very slowly – but will ignite the bomb
         automatically upon impact with anything harder than soft soil. Otherwise, the fuse
         will detonate the bomb in 2D6 turns after it is lit. Otherwise, treat a projectile bomb
         exactly the same as a hand bomb (see above).

         Decksweeper: A short-barrelled rifle with nearly no stock, the decksweeper is named
         for its frequent use on ships and boats. Packed like a blunderbuss, but loaded with a
         series of three slugs instead of shot, a decksweeper does not have the range of a rifle or
         the cloud-effect of a blunderbuss. Instead it has the ability to strike a target up to three
         times with deadly ricocheting slugs. When a target is ‘hit’ by a decksweeper, the firer
         must roll a 1D6–3. The resulting number is the number of slugs that hit the target
         (roll separate Hit Locations for each). Due to the construction of the powder cup on a
         decksweeper, it can be used without fear of getting wet in normal seagoing conditions
         but direct rain or splashed water will soak the powder and ruin the shot.

         Firework: This is an attempt at making a self-propelled bomb. By attaching a tube
         of black powder to a thin stick and capping it with a relatively aerodynamic head, the
         firework is loaded with varying degrees of packed powder to create propulsion – and
         then explosion. The actual attack roll is a simple percentile roll – with the number
         rolled being the opposing number for the targets’ Athletics rolls to get out of the way
         of the impending explosion. Should this attack hit any targets, treat the explosion in
         the same manner as a hand bomb.

         Musket: A barrel-loaded gun that requires the slug and powder to be tamped down
         with a rod or ‘ram’ the musket requires that a flame or fuse be dropped into a small
         cup or notch at the rear of the weapon in order to fire. Adequately accurate to a decent
         range, muskets are best known for ranked firing lines that erupt in lead shot and clouds
         of white smoke. It is often considered to be the standard to which all other firearms
         are compared.

         One-shot Pipe: A very simple weapon that was the predecessor of the pistol, a one-
         shot pipe is a half-metre length of metal with a leather or cloth wrapping around its
         midsection. The pipe is packed with powder at one end and a small ball slug is set into the

                                                                                                        87
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                 2
       opposite one. When a lit fuse or flaming wick is set to the powder the resulting explosion
       sends the ball flying. There is a small degree of danger with the open-powder of the one-
       shot pipe, as anyone firing one has a 50% chance of suffering 1 point of fire-damage to
       his lighting hand from the burning powder erupting backwards. Due to their lengthy
       reload time and danger, one-shot pipes are not a weapon of choice.

       Pistol, breach-loading: This is a category of firearms that comprises any single-shot
       pistol that is loaded from the rear of the weapon, normally where the pistol ‘breaks’ in
       half. A lit fuse tucked into the hammer of the pistol is pushed forward by the simple
       lever action of the trigger, igniting the powder bagged into the firing chamber. Pistols
       have abysmal ranges, even compared to other black powder weaponry but pack a decent
       punch and are sometimes best used up close. Breach-loading pistol attacks used in close
       combat cannot be Evaded.

       Pistol, duelling: In an attempt to add range and accuracy to the common flintlock pistol, the
       duelling pistol is a long-barrelled version of the weapon. Not only does the longer barrel add
       a bit of range but it also gives the slug a fraction of additional force! The longer barrel does,
       however, make it easy for an opponent to parry it away in close combat, eliminating its ability
       to ever be used in close combat practically.

       Pistol, flintlock: The simplest form of true pistol, the flintlock pistol is essentially a barrel-
       loaded firearm with a powder notch and a mechanical flint-striker attached to the trigger.
       Once loaded, a simple pull of the trigger drops the chunk of flint across a small grater or
       chip of steel to send sparks down into the powder. This style of firearm has a slightly longer
       reloading time but the additional force gained by the contained powder is noticeable. Like
       the others of its ilk, a flintlock pistol attack used in close combat cannot be Evaded.

       Pistol, revolver: A flintlock pistol with four separate barrels that are each carefully poured,
       the revolver allows the user to fire four separate shots without reloading but at the cost
       of a longer reload time outside of combat and the possibility of detonating multiple
       barrels at once. Reloading a revolver takes a full ten minutes of cleaning, packing and
       re-assembly; a feat that cannot be undertaken in combat. Every time a revolver is fired
       there is a chance that multiple barrels will go off at once due to bouncing flint sparks or
       stray powder grains, which could result in a dazzling and deadly show of smoke and fire.
       In game terms, each time a revolver fires there is a chance for additional firings equal to
       5%. Should this happen, the attack must be rolled multiple times at the same target, but
       the gun will require double normal reload time due to excess soot and shrapnel inside the
       powder notches. Like attacks from the rest of the short-barrelled pistols, revolver attacks
       used in close combat cannot be Evaded.

       Rifle, breach-loading: This weapon is, quite simply, a much larger version of its pistol
       equivalent with a stock and higher calibre barrel. Equally packed with more powder
       and a bigger slug, the breach-loading rifle has a better range than a musket, but lacks
       some of its damage potential. A breach-loading rifle could be used as a club in close
       combat, but with a –10% penalty to hit.




 88
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                2
         Rifle, flintlock: The rifle
         version of the common




                                                                  2,000 SP per barrel
         flintlock firearm, this heavy
         weapon sometimes comes




                                                                  3,750 SP
                                                                  3,500 SP



                                                                  3,000 SP

                                                                  4,000 SP
                                                                  1,000 SP
                                                                  3,500 SP
                                                                  4,000 SP
                                                                  3,000 SP
                                                                  6,000 SP
                                                                  4,500 SP
                                                                  5,000 SP
         with a small shield or cover




                                                                  700 SP
                                                                  850 SP

                                                                  550 SP
                                                                  Cost1
         for the powder-notch so as
         not to shower the firer’s face
         with burning powder grains.




                                                                  AP/HP
         Loaded and fired in the




                                                                  4/7
                                                                  4/8
                                                                  4/3
                                                                  4/4
                                                                  4/5
                                                                  1/2
                                                                  4/8
                                                                  4/3
                                                                  4/4
                                                                  4/3
                                                                  4/4
                                                                  4/4
                                                                  4/6
                                                                  4/7
                                                                  4/7
         same manner as the flintlock
         pistol, the rifle has a very



                                                                  ENC
         admirable range and far




                                                                  —
                                                                  2
                                                                  3
                                                                  1
                                                                  1
                                                                  2

                                                                  3
                                                                  1
                                                                  1
                                                                  1
                                                                  1
                                                                  2
                                                                  2
                                                                  2
                                                                  3
         more punch than its pistol
                                                                  STR/DEX
         counterpart. A flintlock rifle
         could be used as a club in
                                                                  10/9
                                                                  10/9
                                                                  11/9
                                                                  –/10

                                                                  –/10
                                                                  11/9
                                                                  –/10
                                                                  9/10



                                                                  10/9
                                                                  10/9
                                                                  10/7
                                                                  11/9
                                                                  9/9




                                                                  9/9
                                                                  9/7
         close combat, but with a
         –10% penalty to hit.




                                                                  10/–20%
                                                                  5/–10%




                                                                  5/–20%

                                                                  6/–10%

                                                                  3/–15%
                                                                  3/–10%



                                                                  3/–15%
                                                                  4/–10%
                                                                  Special



                                                                  Special
                                                                  8/–5%




                                                                  4/–5%
         Rifle, multi-shot: Called
                                                                  Load




         a number of different
                                                                  —
                                                                  —

                                                                  —
         names, this category of
         firearm contains any of the
         ‘ingenious’ attempts to make
                                                                  Range




                                                                  Varies
                                                                  20m




                                                                  50m
                                                                  30m



                                                                  10m



                                                                  40m
                                                                  35m
                                                                  40m
                                                                  4m
                                                                  5m

                                                                  5m



                                                                  5m
                                                                  6m

                                                                  5m
                                                                  6m
         revolver versions of a rifle.
         They are heavy and often
         very unwieldy, imposing a
         –5% cumulative penalty to
                                                                  Damage




                                                                  4D6+2
                                                                  2D8+1



                                                                  2D4+1
                                                                  1D6+2
                                                                  1D6+1



                                                                  2D4+1
         hit for every full two barrels
                                                                  2D8
                                                                  4D6
                                                                  6D6
                                                                  8D8
                                                                  2D4



                                                                  1D6
                                                                  2D4




                                                                  2D6
                                                                  2D6
         the weapon has. All of the
         standard rules (including
         those regarding multi-
         barrelled explosions) for a
                                                                  See Description

                                                                  See Description
                                                                  Black Powder
                                                                  Black Powder



                                                                  Black Powder

                                                                  Black Powder
                                                                  Black Powder
                                                                  Black Powder
                                                                  Black Powder
                                                                  Black Powder
                                                                  Black Powder
                                                                  Black Powder
                                                                  Black Powder
                                                                  Black Powder




         revolver pistol apply, except
                                                                  Throwing




         that it takes a full half-hour
         to clean and reload a multi-
                                                                  Skill




         shot rifle. There is rumour
         that a seven-barrelled ‘volley
         gun’ exists that is designed to
                                           Black Powder Weapons




         fire all at once on purpose
         but such a weapon would
                                                                  Pistol, Breach-loading3




                                                                  Rifle, Breach-loading




         have a ridiculous recoil and
                                                                  Bomb, Projectile2




                                                                  Pistol, Flintlock 3




                                                                  Rifle, Multi-shot
                                                                  Pistol, Duelling

                                                                  Pistol, Revolver




         would most likely cause more
                                                                  Rifle, Flintlock
                                                                  One-shot Pipe
                                                                  Bomb, Hand2

                                                                  Decksweeper
                                                                  Blunderbuss




         damage to the firer than the
                                                                  Firework2
                                                                  Arquebus
                                                                  Weapon




         target!
                                                                  Musket




                                                                                            89
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                     2
                                           TRANSPORT
       The following section introduces a number of vehicles, some of which are designed
       specifically for war while others are built to carry a family’s goods long distances. These
       are simply devices used to take one or more Adventurers over distances under some
       form of locomotion. They are all classified as ‘transport’ even if they actually carry
       nothing more than a single person for the purpose of battle – transport is a general term
       that covers all ground vehicles.

       Also included in this section are extended descriptions and uses for transportation as
       found in Legend. The Transportation table on page 95 shows a collection of ground
       transport vehicles available in Legend, with new and other varieties likely to appear in
       future sourcebooks and scenarios.

       Each Vehicle is characterised by the following qualities:

       Common Speed: This modifies the total Movement per round of the being(s) Drawing
       the vehicle (see below for more details) to a minimum of one metre per round.

       Driving Modifier: This is the modification applied to Driving skill of anyone driving
       the vehicle.

       Maximum Drawing Mounts: This is the maximum number of animals that can be
       harnessed to the particular vehicle for the purposes of pulling it along.

       AP/HP: The Armour Points and Hit Points of the vehicle as a whole. Once the vehicle
       is reduced to zero Hit Points it is destroyed.

       Ram Damage: The damage the vehicle inflicts if performing a ram (see page 97).

       ENC Limitation: This is the total amount of ENC the vehicle can carry before
       reducing the vehicle’s Movement. For every 10 ENC the vehicle carries over its limit,
       Movement is reduced by one metre.

       Carriage, Armoured: Used to ferry important individuals who might be targeted for
       violence, this is a twin-axel, four-wheeled wagon with framed and reinforced walls
       that hide a relatively comfortable internal cabin. The carriage supports three to five
       passengers inside with room for some small baggage and the driver sits in a recessed
       bench on top of the carriage. The walls of the carriage are reinforced on the outside
       with hardened leather and riveted metal, and then have fabric stretched over them to
       keep the illusion of a ‘common’ carriage. The driver has slightly raised walls on the

 90
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                         2
         sides of his bench that grant him the additional AP of the vehicle, over and above any
         AP he has himself. The doors to the carriage are easily reinforced with crossbars found
         inside and impose a –30% penalty to any Brawn Skill Tests to try and force them open.

         Carriage, Covered: This is a simple carriage with wooden walls and soft leather curtains
         to keep others from looking inside. It likely has two wooden benches inside and a
         ceiling-mounted baggage rack in order to carry passenger bags. What cannot fit inside
         is often tethered to the roof of the cabin, causing it to creak and groan considerably
         when in motion. It is a good way to travel if someone does not want to deal with the
         elements.

         Carriage, Noble: For those who have coin to spare and live in the lap of luxury, a noble
         carriage is not unlike a common covered carriage – save for the expense of creating
         and decorating it. The outside is often adorned with enamel paint in beautiful and
         extravagant designs, as well as etchings and carvings in the wood itself to make the
         carriage look royal. It even includes a padded seat for the driver. Inside, the cabin is
         leather and plush with polished and sometimes sculpted walls that make the passengers
         feel comfortable and truly pampered. Some noble carriages are even known to have
         racks with wine or cheese to be served on longer trips in the fanciful carriage.

         Cart, Large: A large cart is built from huge planks of wood and has large, thick wheels.
         It is used to transport several passengers or heavy loads of cargo. Rarely covered by
         anything but a leather tarp when necessary, carts are best served for short trips while
         under close watch by escorting guards. Often drawn by pairs of mules or pack horses, a
         large cart can cause significant damage if it barrels into a foe – but no cart is well-made
         for ramming or combat.

         Cart, Medium: A very common goods-hauler, a medium cart is easily pulled by a
         single mule or horse and can carry a healthy amount of trading wares or adventuring
         gear. Any party worth its salt will eventually invest in a good cart to haul around its
         constantly fluctuating loot, injured members and other items it might need to take
         possession of. Rarely very fancy or attractive, the medium cart is a commonplace sight
         across all civilisations.

         Cart, Ox: A step up from the medium cart but not quite as hefty as the largest variety,
         the ox cart is made from heavy wood and thick metal bindings. It is best hauled by
         either a pair of mules or horses, or a single ox. It can carry a decent amount of weight
         and maybe a passenger or two. There are some farmers that will fill the cart with goods
         for sale, lash in one of their oxen, take it to market and sell literally everything. The
         goods, the ox and even the cart – all transformed into coin for the farmer to do it all
         again next season with a new ox, cart and supply of goods!

         Cart, Small: For the Adventurer or traveller on the go, a small cart rarely has more
         than two wheels and can be drawn easily by a single mule or pony. It is not designed to
         carry much more than a single person’s worth of goods and does not have a driver’s seat
         at all. Instead, the driver is expected to ride a second pony or horse alongside the cart.
         Really only useful for those few who want to bring just slightly more than what their
                                                                                                       91
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                2
       saddlebags can carry, a small cart is best for carrying goods within the same community
       rather than for long travels.

       Chariot, Battle: A two-wheeled, open-backed vehicle drawn by two or more steeds
       that allows warriors to attack from the raised and spiked walls, the battle chariot is
       devoted to causing harm to others. From its blade-spoke wheels to its sharpened rein-
       prow and armoured body, this vehicle can cause significant damage when driven into
       units of infantry. Best suited to have a dedicated driver crouched low to the front and
       an archer or javelineer behind him, a battle chariot can circle its enemies while picking
       off the outermost targets. Some charioteers prefer to have lancers or axemen ready to
       take swipes at those who get out of the way of the ramming vehicle – but risk getting
       harmed or drawn from the chariot themselves by those they are fighting.

       As the walls of the battle chariot cover the legs and abdomen of the driver, these locations
       are considered to be covered as per the Cover rules in the Legend Core Rulebook. This
       only applies to attacks originating from the front or sides of the chariot; no cover is
       gained if attacks are launched from the driver’s rear.

       Chariot, Heavy: The heavy chariot is designed to be pulled forward by a team of
       massive horses numbering four or more, gathering significant speeds over flat terrain. It
       is able to carry a handful of passengers and their equipment, with each of them having
       significant room to move. Most often used by plains or desert peoples, heavy chariots
       are also used to cross long distances with several possessions in tow.

       As the walls of the heavy chariot cover the arms, legs and abdomen of the driver,
       these locations are considered to be covered as per the Cover rules in the Legend Core
       Rulebook. This only applies to attacks originating from the front or sides of the chariot;
       no cover is gained if attacks are launched from the driver’s rear.

       Chariot, Light: Small, light and fast is the design idea behind the light chariot. Room
       only for the driver, the light chariot was born out of competition and sport racing
       rather than combat or travel.

       As the walls of the light chariot cover the legs of the driver, these locations are considered
       to be covered as per the Cover rules in the Legend Core Rulebook. This only applies to
       attacks originating from the front or sides of the chariot; no cover is gained if attacks
       are launched from the driver’s rear.

       Chariot, War: Basically a battle chariot with an additional rear wall, jutting blades and
       spikes from armoured wheels, as well as downward facing blades around the wall edges,
       a war chariot is an armoured and deadly weapon. Able to smash through enemies on
       foot as if they were weeds underfoot while bringing soldiers or archers to bear from its
       protected body, a war chariot can be all a force needs to break their foes.

       As the walls of the war chariot cover the legs and abdomen of the driver, these locations
       are considered to be covered as per the Cover rules on page136 of the Legend Core

 92
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                            2
         Rulebook. This only applies to attacks originating from the front or sides of the chariot;
         no cover is gained if attacks are launched from the driver’s rear.

         Howdah, Light: A howdah is basically a giant box that sits on a layer of leather, wool
         and fabric on the back of any large animal – from elephants and mammoths to trained
         dinosaurs. From within this sometimes covered structure, which is almost always belted
         to the beast like some kind of gigantic saddle, a handful of riders can sit on plush
         cushions or benches while the creature plods them around. The driver rarely actually
         sits within the howdah, needing to have much better access to the sensitive areas of the
         creature in order to steer it with goads, reins or sometimes just clicks and calls. Due
         to the higher vantage point, riders can only be targeted by ranged attacks. Howdahs
         cannot make Ram attacks but by using his Drive skill the rider may make the mount
         attack normally.

         Howdah, War: Built for battle, a war howdah is essentially the same as a light howdah
         – a large box wagon fitted to the top of a large beast – but has armoured and raised
         walls with notches for archers and spear-throwers. Some even have extensions to the
         front to protect the driver from ranged attacks. War howdahs almost always have
         several chains and ropes to reinforce the attachment to the carrying beast, and several
         leather belts to keep riders standing where they need to should the beast buck or kick
         unexpectedly. Due to the higher vantage point, riders can only be targeted by ranged
         attacks. Howdahs cannot make Ram attacks but by using his Drive skill the rider may
         make the mount attack normally.

         As the walls of the war howdah cover the legs and abdomen of the driver, these locations
         are considered to be covered as per the Cover rules on page 136 of the Legend Core
         Rulebook.

         Night Coach: There are some Adventurers or travellers who feel they must make as
         much progress as they can under the cover of darkness and the night coach is the
         perfect vehicle for them. Little more than a common carriage painted with pitch tar
         and resin, coated to be as dark as a moonless night, many of the moving parts on the
         night coach are heavily oiled or greased to keep ambient noise down. The night coach
         is generally drawn by black, shoeless steeds or even alternate mounts if quieter ones are
         available. Designed to move quickly and stealthily along hard-packed dirt, even the
         wheels to the coach have rounded studs for extra traction in soft soil. In game terms,
         anyone who rolls a Perception test to locate the night coach in optimum conditions (no
         moon, non-stoned road and so on) will suffer a –30% penalty. It is up to the Games
         Master to decide whether or not conditions are optimal, and what sort of reduction to
         this penalty other circumstances might bring about.

         Palanquin: Although the actual structure and look of this vehicle varies greatly, the
         design is more or less the same. A palanquin is a flat floor with four or more ‘handles’
         to which beings (often slaves or servants) clutch in order to lift the floor off the ground
         and walk with it. The floor commonly has some kind of throne or bedding on it,
         sometimes with a screened or veiled tent obscuring it from outside view. The palanquin
         is a good way of advertising one’s superior position to those beneath it and most who

                                                                                                       93
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                2
       witness someone being carried on a palanquin automatically assume he is some kind
       of royalty or nobility. In fact, this view is so ingrained that the rider gains a +10% to
       his Influence skill while being carried so long as the target(s) of his skill recognise his
       superior position.

       Rickshaw: Sort of a ‘human-drawn chariot’, the rickshaw is a small wooden cart that
       might be able to hold two passengers on a seated bench while the ‘drawing steeds’ (who
       are also the drivers) pull the rickshaw forward using a shoulder/arm harness attached
       to the front of the vehicle. Hailing from communities that either do not have room
       for or are too poor to feed proper steeds for carriages or chariots, the rickshaw is also
       a good way for peasantry to make a small wage without having to learn a true craft or
       skill. The most simple dullard can pull a rickshaw, and many do, but there are also just
       as many intelligent and hard-working rickshaw drivers that make their living taxiing
       others around.

       Sled, Dog: This simple and traditional vehicle is similar to a common chariot that
       has had the wheels replaced with two very long waxen boards or slats. Drawn by large
       teams of canines or smaller hoofed animals (deer, antelope and so on), they are simply
       dragged over grass, sand and soil. Not good for rocky or uneven terrain, sleds are best
       suited for open areas with soft ground. In game terms, a Games Master can decide
       that the terrain is not suitable for a sled and either impose a movement penalty, assign
       damage to the sled itself as it is ground to pieces or rule it cannot move at all.

       Sled, Heavy: A much larger version of the common dog sled, heavy sleds are useful for
       crossing much longer distances due to their built-in bench and baggage compartments.
       Heavy sleds almost always have some kind of third skid in the front of the sled itself to
       handle a bit of the extra weight.

       Sled, Ice: A specific type of dog sled, the ice sled replaces its flat slats with tempered
       metal ‘blades’ that allow it to skirt across slick ice as if it were any other normal kind
       of terrain for the sled. These blades make it very difficult to bring the sled to speed or
       manoeuvre when not on snow or ice, using the second set of modifiers for Movement
       and Driving Skill Tests listed on the table. As with other sleds, a Games Master can
       decide that the terrain is especially bad for an ice sled to be drawn across and either
       impose a Movement penalty, assign damage to the sled itself as it is ground to pieces or
       rule the vehicle is stuck and cannot move at all.

       Sled, War: Designed by belligerent barbarians who likely came from a snowy home,
       the war sled is nothing more than a wheel-less battle chariot. Instead of spiked or
       bladed wheels, the war sled has metre-long sword blade extensions along the sides.
       These blades carve into the legs of those unfortunate enough to be near the war sled
       as it passes mercilessly by. As with the other sleds, a Games Master can decide that the
       terrain is too rough or uneven for a war sled to move across and can either impose a
       Movement penalty, assign damage to the sled’s slats as they are ground to bits or deny
       the sled the ability to move at all without flipping.


 94
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                         2
                               Transportation
                                                    Common                      Maximum Drawing                           ENC
                               Vehicle              Speed    Driving Modifier   Mounts            AP/HP   Ram Damage      Limitation   Cost
                               Carriage, Armoured   –6m      –5%                4                 4/60    2D8+drawn DM    150          1,750 SP
                               Carriage, Covered    –2m      —                  4                 2/40    1D8+drawn DM    200          550 SP




Alex Greene (order #3215550)
                               Carriage, Noble      –2m      —                  4                 2/45    1D8+drawn DM    180          1,000 SP
                               Cart, Large          –3m      –5%                2                 2/50    1D6+drawn DM    500          100 SP
                               Cart, Medium         –2m      —                  2                 2/40    1D4+drawn DM    350          75 SP
                               Cart, Ox             –1m      —                  2                 2/45    1D4+drawn DM    400          80 SP
                               Cart, Small          –1m      +10%               1                 2/30    1D3+drawn DM    200          50 SP
                               Chariot, Battle      –2m      –5%                4                 4/30    1D10+drawn DM   100          750 SP
                               Chariot, Heavy       –4m      —                  4                 3/30    1D8+drawn DM    125          600 SP
                               Chariot, Light       –1m      +5%                2                 3/25    1D6+drawn DM    50           500 SP
                               Chariot, War         –3m      –10%               8                 5/30    2D8+drawn DM    100          900 SP
                               Howdah, Light        –2m      —                  1                 2/30    N/A             200          200 SP
                               Howdah, War          –4m      –10%               1                 4/40    N/A             200          500 SP
                               Night Coach          –2m      –5%                4                 3/40    1D8+drawn DM    180          650 SP
                               Palanquin            –4m      —                  8                 2/20    N/A             75           500 SP
                               Rickshaw             –2m      —                  2                 2/18    1D3+drawn DM    35           125 SP
                               Sled, Dog            —        —                  14                2/24    1D4+drawn DM    20/80        150 SP
                               Sled, Heavy          –2m      –5%                10                3/30    1D6+drawn DM    150          200 SP
                               Sled, Ice            –/–6m    –/–15%             12                3/24    1D4+drawn DM    100          225 SP
                               Sled, War            –4m      –5%                8                 4/32    1D8+drawn DM    100          400 SP
                               Tiger Cage           –4m      –10%               4                 4/45    1D8+drawn DM    100          500 SP




                        95
2
       Tiger Cage: Also called a ‘slaver’s wagon,’ the tiger cage is little more than a flatbed
       cart with metal reinforced walls or bars. Used by carnivals or freak shows to harbour
       dangerous animals and creatures, or by travelling slavers who need to keep a lock on their
       wares lest they escape, the tiger cage is little more than a prison on wheels. Some might
       use bars with spikes or flanges pointing inward to help keep their ‘property’ pacified,
       but in the case of dangerous animals these precautions merely risk injuring the beasts. It
       would take a –50% Brawn Skill Test in order to bend even one of the thick metal bars,
       with the heavy grating door to the cage itself not being any easier to damage.


       Driving Transportation Vehicles
       In Legend, unless magic is involved, there must be some form of creature or creatures
       drawing a vehicle to give it locomotion. There must be at least one Adventurer using
       the Drive skill on at least one beast (or slave, or fellow Adventurer and so on) in order
       to move round. Just having someone using the Drive skill in charge of the drawing
       force is enough to make it mobile in most circumstances.

       If a vehicle is simply moving across normal terrain without having any special modifiers
       to the environment (unruly horses, bad weather, slippery road and so on) there is no
       need to make a Drive Skill Test. Should something adverse happen (landslide, spooked
       mounts and so on) the Games Master can call for a Drive Skill Test to keep the vehicle
       steady and moving in the right manner. Failure likely means the vehicle has stopped
       moving, where a Fumble may have caused some form of catastrophe.

       The other main reason a driver would be called to make a Drive Skill Test is during
       combat. Combat is fast-paced, chaotic and an easy way of losing control of the vehicle.
       At the beginning of each Combat Round in which the vehicle is directly involved, the
       driver must make a Drive roll to ensure everything acts normally. If this roll is failed, the
       Driver can only act defensively this turn. If the roll is a Fumble, something terrible has
       gone wrong and the Games Master should narrate the scene in the case of a crash, injured
       steed or other awful circumstances. This roll can be modified in a number of ways:

       Drive Skill Modifiers
       Circumstance                                                    Modifier
       Vehicle Rammed last turn                                        –5%
       Vehicle has 1 to 2 drawing mounts                               +10%
       Vehicle has 3 to 6 drawing mounts                               —
       Vehicle has 7 to 10 drawing mounts                              –5%
       Vehicle has 11+ drawing mounts                                  –10%
       Vehicle moderately damaged (75% to 51% HP left)                 –5%
       Vehicle seriously damaged (50% to 26% HP left)                  –10%
       Vehicle severely damaged (25% or less HP left)                  –15%
       Driver attempted a Close Combat attack last turn                –5%
       Driver attempted a Ranged attack last turn                      –10%
       Driver was attacked last turn                                   –10%
       Driver suffered damage last turn                                –20%
       Driver failed Driving Skill Test last turn                      –10%



 96
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                           2
         If the Drive Skill Test is passed, the Driver may take his Combat Actions as normal,
         giving up the first one to drive the vehicle – which will advance its Movement score
         each Combat Action (including the first) at the Driver’s direction.


         Ram Attacks
         If a Driver has a good degree of control over the vehicle and wishes to try to smash it
         into the enemy, it takes a Drive Skill Test (with all appropriate modifiers applied from
         the list above) to do so. This Drive Skill Test is used in place of a Close Combat Attack
         roll and can be opposed only by the target’s Evade skill.

         Unlike a normal Close Combat attack, a Ram can attack any number of targets that lie
         in its path. The Driver makes one Drive roll for the action and applies it to each target’s
         Evade (if possible) individually. Should the Ram connect, the damage is listed for each
         vehicle, modified by the average Damage Modifier from the drawing mounts, adding
         +1 for each additional drawing mount beyond the first and +1 for every full two metres
         the vehicle has moved in a straight line this turn.


         Additional Drawing Mounts
         The Maximum Drawing Mounts column on the Transportation Table notes the
         maximum number of animals that can be harnessed to a vehicle. The Common Speed
         column notes a negative modifier that is applied to the total speed of all the mounts
         harnessed to vehicle if the number of animals is less than half the Maximum Drawing
         Mounts entry. An Armoured Carriage, for example, has a Maximum Drawing Mounts
         figure of 4 and a Common Speed of –6m. If the carriage is being drawn by one or two
         horses, the entire assembly suffers a –6m penalty per round. However, for every mount
         added to the team above half the Maximum Drawing Mount number, the Common
         Speed penalty is reduced by 1m. Thus, adding a third horse to the Armoured Carriage
         will yield a –5m penalty and a fourth horse will reduce the Common Speed modifier
         to –4m.


         Water Travel
         Transporting goods and people by water is an essential element of most fantasy worlds, as
         well as a cusp event in the growth of a civilisation. A ship under sail can carry more cargo
         than a 100 horses and it can take that cargo to places horses cannot possibly reach.

         The rules given in this section provides the basic information necessary to incorporate
         ship travel and ship combat into a Legend campaign. These are rules designed for
         efficiency and ease of use, not as an encyclopaedic treatise on the art of sailing, as such
         a topic could easily consume 10 books this size.




                                                                                                        97
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                 2
       Ship Designs and Statistics
       Each ship detailed in this chapter shares the following characteristics, whether the ship
       in question is a mighty warship or a simple canoe.

       Length: The distance from bow to stern.

       Beam: The widest part of a ship – usually in the middle. Ships equipped with oars will
       have the beam of the ship increased when the oars are employed. The inclusion of oars
       is considered to increase a ship’s beam to half again its original rating.

       Draft: The depth of water needed for the ship to manoeuvre effectively and avoid
       running aground. This is the distance between the ship’s keel and the waterline.

       Freeboard: The minimum height between the ship’s gunwale and the waterline.
       Comparing two ships’ freeboards can help give the vertical distance an Adventurer
       needs to achieve when jumping from one to the other.

       Capacity: This indicates the cargo capacity of the ship in tons. This number reflects
       the ship’s cargo capacity in addition to the weight of the ship’s rigging, crew, provisions
       and so forth.

       Speed: The speed at which the ship travels per Combat Action / per 12 hour period. A
       ship that relies solely upon sails for propulsion is dependent on the wind for its speed,
       ships which use sail power for propulsion may also have a penalty or bonus to their
       movement rate.

       Seaworthiness: The ability of the ship to stand up to the rigours of sailing. All ships
       must undergo frequent maintenance in order to keep their Seaworthiness rating from
       deteriorating.

       Hull: The hull acts as the ship’s armour, just as a suit of chainmail does for a man.

       Structure Points: Structure points are a ship’s Hit Points. Damage to these represents
       damage to the integrity of the ship itself and ships do not heal of their own accord. A
       ship must be hauled into drydock for Structure Points to be repaired.

       Weapons: This entry denotes either the number of naval weapons that can be mounted
       on the ship or the number and type of cannons normally carried.

       Ram: This entry denotes whether or not the ship is capable of mounting a ram. Just
       because a ship can mount a ram, does not necessarily mean it will. The statistic given in
       parentheses indicates the damage a mounted ram will cause to a rammed ship.

       Skill: Every ship has its own peculiarities and each design presents different challenges.
       This entry firstly denotes which skill is used when operating the ship (nearly always
       either Boating or Shiphandling). Also, though any ship can be operated under ideal

 98
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                         2
         conditions without the necessity of a Skill Test, when the ship and crew are called upon
         for more extreme endeavours , this modifier is applied to the Skill Test. This modifier
         is in addition to any others the Games Master feels are appropriate.


         Barge
         Operating off the same principles as a raft, a barge is a larger and sturdier vessel. It
         retains the raft’s wide, flat bottom, which allows it to carry a good amount of cargo
         but its low Seaworthiness keeps it in its place as coastal vessel, or, more commonly, a
         transport that never leaves harbour.

         Hull: 3
         Structure Points: 100
         Seaworthiness: 10
         Length: 12m
         Beam: 8m
         Draft: 0.5m
         Freeboard: 0.3m
         Capacity: 12 tons
         Crew: 4 rowers or polemen
         Speed: 1m / 8.4km
         Weapons: One
         Skill: Boating +0%
         Cost: 500 SP


         Barque
         A very efficient and large design, the barque was able to outperform most other ship
         types with a comparatively small crew. These vessels became the workhorses of the age
         of sail, their low running cost and large cargo capacity making them a favourite of
         merchants.

         Hull: 4
         Structure Points: 350
         Seaworthiness: 25
         Length: 100m
         Beam: 13m
         Draft: 7.5m
         Freeboard: 6m
         Capacity: 4,000 tons
         Crew: 30
         Speed: Sail
         Weapons: Fore: None
         Aft: None
         Broadside: Eight 18-pounders (4D8 each)
         Skill: Shiphandling +0%
         Cost: 80,000 SP


                                                                                                    99
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                             2
       Bireme
       A leap forward in nautical engineering, the bireme mounts two banks of oars on either
       side, presenting a shorter profile in the water and enabling the ship to reach greater
       rates of speed than a war galley can manage. These heavy-duty warships are suitable for
       engaging in naval warfare or as troop transports and landing vessels.

       Hull: 3
       Structure Points: 60
       Seaworthiness: 12
       Length: 20m
       Beam: 3m
       Draft: 1m
       Freeboard: 1m
       Capacity: 1 ton
       Crew: 60 rowers, 10 officers and sailors, 10 marines or archers
       Speed: 5m / 43.2km when rowed
       Weapons: Two
       Ram: Yes (D3 points of damage for every metre of speed)
       Skill: Shiphandling +0%
       Cost: 15,000 SP


       Brigantine
       A small, two masted ship Brigantines are capable vessels, able to operate efficiently
       across oceans as well as in coastal regions.

       Hull: 4
       Structure Points: 250
       Seaworthiness: 15
       Length: 30m
       Beam: 6m
       Draft: 2.5m
       Freeboard: 4m
       Capacity: 100 tons
       Crew: 60
       Speed: Sail
       Weapons: Fore: None
       Aft: Four 18-pounders (4D8 each)
       Broadside: Ten 18-pounders (4D8 each)
       Skill: Shiphandling +0%
       Cost: 50,000 SP




 100
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                     2
         Canoe
         A canoe is a simple and effective craft, primarily designed for traversing rivers, streams
         and lakes. It is capable of ocean travel but a large wave could swamp it easily.

         Most canoes are formed of hides sewn about a wooden skeleton. Other cultures build
         canoes by hollowing out the interior of a large tree trunk, which results in a sturdier
         (and much, much heavier) canoe. The statistics for this ‘dugout’ canoe are placed in
         parentheses after the statistics for the hide canoe. A hide canoe weighs approximately
         75 kg. A dugout canoe weighs in at 200 kg.

         Hull: 1 (2)
         Structure Points: 4 (6)
         Seaworthiness: 7
         Length: 3m
         Beam: 0.75m
         Draft: 0.3m
         Freeboard: 0.3m
         Capacity: 0.25 tons
         Crew: 1–2 rowers
         Speed: 4m / 69.6 km
         Weapons: None
         Ram: No
         Skill: Boating +20%
         Cost: 100 SP


         Carrack
         A larger and more sophisticated vessel than the cog, a carrack is capable of ocean going
         voyages and carries enough supplies for very long journeys. Their large cargo capacity
         also makes them ideal merchant vessels. Most carracks are the same size as the one
         listed here although far larger ones can be built.

         Hull: 4
         Structure Points: 100
         Seaworthiness: 25
         Length: 26m
         Beam: 8.5m
         Draft: 2.5m
         Freeboard: 4m
         Capacity: 80 tons
         Crew: 60 officers and sailors
         Speed: Sail –4m/–4km
         Weapons: Four
         Ram: No
         Skill: Shiphandling +0%
         Cost: 30,000 SP


                                                                                                      101
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                2
       Cog
       With the creation of the cog, the merchant ship finally came into its own. Sturdy,
       reliable and swift for its size, the cog is capable of transporting vast amounts of cargo
       across the widest of oceans. A good cog and a good trade route will make the owner of
       the vessel a very rich man.

       Hull: 4
       Structure Points: 80
       Seaworthiness: 28
       Length: 24m
       Beam: 7m
       Draft: 3.5m
       Freeboard: 4m
       Capacity: 75 tons
       Crew: 25 officers and sailors
       Speed: Sail –4m/–4km
       Weapons: Two
       Ram: No
       Skill: Shiphandling +10%
       Cost: 20,000 SP


       Corvette
       Small ships which are similar to sloops they are, nonetheless capable warships. These
       agile vessels are perfect for attacking larger, poorly armed merchantmen and are
       favourites of pirates and privateers.

       Hull: 4
       Structure Points: 150
       Seaworthiness: 18
       Length: 18m
       Beam: 3m
       Draft: 3m
       Freeboard: 2m
       Capacity: 40 tons
       Crew: 50
       Speed: Sail +2m / +2km
       Weapons: Fore: Two 9-pounders (4D6 each)
       Broadside: Eight 9-pounders (4D6 each)
       Skill: Shiphandling +0%
       Cost: 35,000 SP




 102
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                       2
         Fishing Boat
         Small craft of various designed used along many coastal areas these numerous vessels
         are normally only used a relatively short distance away from the small coastal villages
         where fishermen are found.

         Hull: 3
         Structure Points: 100
         Seaworthiness: 18
         Length: 7.5m
         Beam: 2.5m
         Draft: 1.5m
         Freeboard: 0.6m
         Capacity: 10 tons
         Crew: 3
         Speed: Sail
         Weapons: None
         Ram: No
         Skill: Boating +0%
         Cost: 600 SP


         Fluyt
         Small merchant vessels which are cheap to build fluyts are capable of crossing oceans
         and are the backbone of many a merchant fleet.

         Hull: 4
         Structure Points: 200
         Seaworthiness: 20
         Length: 30m
         Beam: 5m
         Draft: 2.5m
         Freeboard: 4m
         Capacity: 150 tons
         Crew: 40
         Speed: Sail –6m/–6km
         Weapons: Fore: None
         Aft: Four 18-pounders (4D8 each)
         Broadside: Eight 18-pounders (4D8 each)
         Skill: Shiphandling –10%
         Cost: 20,000 SP




                                                                                                   103
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                             2
       Frigate
       Powerful warships frigates are large sailing vessels distinguished by having all their
       guns on their upper deck (unlike ships of the line, which have their guns on multiple
       decks).

       Hull: 5
       Structure Points: 250
       Seaworthiness: 20
       Length: 40m
       Beam: 10m
       Draft: 4m
       Freeboard: 4m
       Capacity: 80 tons
       Crew: 120
       Speed: Sail +4m/+4km
       Weapons: Fore: Two 9-pounders (4D6 each)
       Aft: Two 9-pounders (4D6 each)
       Broadside: 24 24-pounders (4D10 each)
       Skill: Shiphandling +10%
       Cost: 300,000 SP


       Galleon
       Galleons varied in size considerably, with some being far smaller than the vessel shown
       here. Powerful warships with potent firepower engaging a galleon is never a task to be
       taken lightly.

       Hull: 5
       Structure Points: 350
       Seaworthiness: 20
       Length: 50m
       Beam: 15m
       Draft: 10m
       Freeboard: 7m
       Capacity: 2,000 tons
       Crew: 320
       Speed: Sail –6m/–6km
       Weapons: Fore: Four 18-pounders (4D8 each)
       Aft: Four 18-pounders (4D8 each)
       Broadside: 32 18-pounders (4D8 each), 16 24-pounders (4D10 each)
       Skill: Shiphandling –10%
       Cost: 350,000 SP




 104
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                     2
         Indiaman
         Ocean going merchantmen designed to carry both passengers and cargo Indiamen
         are capable ships able to defend themselves against pirates.

         Hull: 4
         Structure Points: 300
         Seaworthiness: 15
         Length: 50m
         Beam: 12m
         Draft: 7m
         Freeboard: 7m
         Capacity: 300 tons
         Crew: 250
         Speed: Sail –4m/–4km
         Weapons: Fore: Four 9-pounders (4D6 each)
         Aft: Six 9-pounders (4D6 each)
         Broadside: 12 18-pounders (4D8 each)
         Skill: Shiphandling –10%
         Cost: 70,000 SP


         Junk
         A twin-masted merchantman capable of long voyages. Far larger junks existed, including
         some of the largest wooden ships ever built.

         Hull: 3
         Structure Points: 75
         Seaworthiness: 20
         Length: 25m
         Beam: 6m
         Draft: 0.5m
         Freeboard: 2.5m
         Capacity: 45 tons
         Crew: 6
         Speed: Sail
         Weapons: None
         Ram: No
         Skill: Shiphandling +10%
         Cost: 18,000 SP




                                                                                                  105
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                            2
       Longship
       One of the most efficient and effective ship designs ever created, the longship is a lean
       craft that is equally comfortable under oars or sail. It can mount a ram but is more
       often used as a raiding or exploration vessel.

       Hull: 3
       Structure Points: 70
       Seaworthiness: 20
       Length: 28m
       Beam: 6m
       Draft: 1.5m
       Freeboard: 1.5m
       Capacity: 20 tons
       Crew: 50 rowers, up to 200 marines or archers
       Speed: 5m / 43.2km when rowed
       Weapons: Two
       Ram: Yes (D2 points of damage for every metre of speed)
       Skill: Shiphandling +20%
       Cost: 20,000 SP


       Raft
       The simplest form of watergoing vessel, a raft is simply a collection of logs lashed
       together with rope. It is usually propelled by two men wielding poles but it is possible
       to outfit it with a sail. This does not increase the craft’s speed, it simply makes life easier
       for those aboard.

       Hull: 1
       Structure Points: 50
       Seaworthiness: 10
       Length: 6m
       Beam: 2m
       Draft: 0.3m
       Freeboard: 0.1m
       Capacity: 4 tons
       Crew: 2 polemen
       Speed: 1m / 8.4km
       Weapons: None
       Ram: No
       Skill: Boating –10%
       Cost: 50 SP




 106
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                             2
         Rowboat
         This small craft is often carried as an auxiliary boat aboard large ships, allowing the
         crew to come to shore without the need of a deep draft and docking facilities required
         by a ship.

         Hull: 2
         Structure Points: 15
         Seaworthiness: 15
         Length: 3m
         Beam: 1.5m
         Draft: 0.3m
         Freeboard: 0.6m
         Capacity: 0.5 tons
         Crew: 1 rower
         Speed: 2m / 16.8km
         Weapons: None
         Ram: No
         Skill: Boating +0%
         Cost: 300 SP


         Schooner
         Small, fast sailing vessels schooners are a favourite of pirates who put their elusiveness
         to good use.

         Hull: 4
         Structure Points: 180
         Seaworthiness: 20
         Length: 30m
         Beam: 7m
         Draft: 3.5m
         Freeboard: 3m
         Capacity: 80 tons
         Crew: 50
         Speed: Sail
         Weapons: Fore: Two 9-pounders (4D6 each)
         Aft: Two 9-pounders (4D6 each)
         Broadside: Five 18-pounders (4D8 each)
         Skill: Shiphandling +10%
         Cost: 35,000 SP




                                                                                                      107
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                2
       Small Trader
       Small and normally unarmed traders which are mainly consigned to short channel
       crossings or coastal waters.

       Hull: 3
       Structure Points: 100
       Seaworthiness: 18
       Length: 12m
       Beam: 4m
       Draft: 3m
       Freeboard: 2.5m
       Capacity: 40 tons
       Crew: 10
       Speed: +0
       Weapons: Fore: None
       Aft: None
       Broadside: None
       Skill: Shiphandling +0%
       Cost: 15,000 SP



       Snow
       Small warships, snows are twin masted vessels which mainly operate on lakes and in
       coastal waters.

       Hull: 4
       Structure Points: 220
       Seaworthiness: 18
       Length: 30m
       Beam: 5m
       Draft: 1.5m
       Freeboard: 2m
       Capacity: 80 tons
       Crew: 60
       Speed: Sail +2m/2 km
       Weapons: Fore: None
       Aft: Two 18-pounders (4D8 each)
       Broadside: Ten 18-pounders (4D8 each)
       Skill: Shiphandling –10%
       Cost: 30,000 SP




 108
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                2
         Trireme
         Fast and deadly, the trireme is a mammoth warship. It mounts three banks of oars on
         either side and is an exceptional vessel for all types of warfare. Unfortunately, the large
         number of oars it mounts requires a large number of rowers.

         Hull: 4
         Structure Points: 80
         Seaworthiness: 18
         Length: 37m
         Beam: 4.5m
         Draft: 2.5m
         Freeboard: 3m
         Capacity: 1.5 tons
         Crew: 170 rowers, 25 officers and sailors, 20 marines
         Speed: 6m / 51.6km when rowed
         Weapons: Three
         Ram: Yes (D4 points of damage for every metre of speed)
         Skill: Shiphandling +0%
         Cost: 25,000 SP


         War Galley
         This light and fast ship is designed for coastal manoeuvres, not oceanic travel. It is low
         and fast, propelled by a bank of 25 oars on either side. Many war galleys mount rams.

         Hull: 3
         Structure Points: 40
         Seaworthiness: 12
         Length: 27m
         Beam: 6m
         Draft: 0.5m
         Freeboard: 1m
         Capacity: 2 tons
         Crew: 50 rowers, 10 officers and sailors
         Speed: 4m / 34.8km when rowed
         Weapons: Two
         Ram: Yes (D2 points of damage for every metre of speed)
         Skill: Shiphandling –10%
         Cost: 7,000 SP




                                                                                                       109
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                 2
       War Junk
       A large five masted-vessel capable of dominating most contemporary navies. Their high
       cost means only the wealthiest of noblemen can afford their construction and the most
       powerful of emperors can call upon a fleet of these ships to do their bidding.

       Hull: 4
       Structure Points: 15
       Seaworthiness: 15
       Length: 50m
       Beam: 16m
       Draft: 6m
       Freeboard: 8m
       Capacity: 0.5 tons
       Crew: 150 sailors, 400 soldiers
       Speed: Sail
       Weapons: 10
       Ram: No
       Modifier: Shiphandling +0%
       Cost: 150,000 SP


       Movement
       There are two means of propelling a ship in the days before mechanised engines –
       rowing/poling and sails. Many of the ships listed are capable of using both and each
       has its own advantages.


       Rowing
       Each vessel capable of movement by rowing or poling has a Speed entry in its description.
       This is the ship’s base Movement in normal operating conditions. Rowing a vessel at
       this normal speed counts as medium activity for determining Fatigue.

       The vessel can be slowed to half speed, which counts only as light activity for the rowers to
       maintain. The speed of the vessel can also be doubled, a gruelling activity which counts as
       heavy activity for the rowers.

       If the vessel is operating against a fresh gale or heavier wind, the level of activity is
       increased by one step. Thus moving at half speed counts as medium activity, moving at
       normal speed counts as heavy activity and the vessel cannot move at double speed.

       That said, if the vessel is operating before a fresh gale or heavier wind, the level of
       activity is decreased by one step. Thus moving at normal speed counts as light activity
       and moving at double speed counts as medium activity.

       Wind Speed: The speed of the prevailing winds.

       Against: The vessel is moving against or perpendicular to the direction of the wind.

 110
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                           2
         Sailing Speed
                         Before the                                                    Skill
         Wind Speed      Wind              Quarter Wind     Half Wind    Head Wind     Modifier
         Calm            1m / 16.8km       —                —            —             0%
         Light Wind      3m / 52.8km       2m / 33.6km      1m /         —             0%
                                                            16.8km
         Moderate        5m / 86.4km       4m / 69.6km      3m /         1m / 16.8km 0%
         Wind                                               52.8km
         Stiff Wind      7m / 121km        6m / 103.2km     5m /         2m / 33.6km –10%
                                                            86.4km
         Fresh Gale      9m / 155.5km      8m / 138.2km     7m /         3m / 52.8km –20%
                                                            121km
         Full Gale       *                 *                *            *             –40%
         Hurricane       *                 *                *            *             –60%

         *The winds of a full gale or a hurricane will shred a ship’s rigging. In such a situation,
         the best that can be done is to deploy a small amount of sailcloth to keep the ship
         steady and hope to ride out the storm. Alternatively, the truly reckless or desperate may
         press onward, at the same speed as a fresh gale but with double the normal skill penalty.

         Ship Costs
                                                       Cost by Area
          Ship           Wilds    Rural/Small Town    Large Town Small City        Large City
          Barge          —        —                   550 SP        500 SP         500 SP
          Barque         —        —                   —             80,000 SP      80,000 SP
          Brigantine     —        —                   —             50,000 SP      50,000 SP
          Bireme         —        —                   —             15,000 SP      15,000 SP
          Canoe          50 SP    50 SP               100 SP        100 SP         150 SP
          Carrack        —        —                   —             30,000 SP      30,000 SP
          Cog            —        —                   —             20,000 SP      20,000 SP
          Corvette       —        —                   —             35,000 SP      35,000 SP
          Dhow           —        —                   —             25,000 SP      25,000 SP
          Fishing Boat   —        450 SP              600 SP        600 SP         800 SP
          Frigate        —        —                   —             300,000 SP     300,000 SP
          Galleon        —        —                   —             350,000 SP     350,000 SP
          Indiaman       —        —                   —             70,000 SP      70,000 SP
          Junk           —        —                   —             18,000 SP      18,000 SP
          Longship       —        —                   —             20,000 SP      20,000 SP
          Raft           75 SP    50 SP               50 SP         50 SP          75 SP
          Rowboat        —        400 SP              350 SP        300 SP         300 SP
          Schooner       —        —                                 35,000 SP      35,000 SP
          Small Trader   —        —                   —             20,000 SP      20,000 SP
          Snow           —        —                                 30,000 SP      30,000 SP
          Trireme        —        —                   —             25,000 SP      25,000 SP
          War Galley     —        —                   —             7,000 SP       7,000 SP
          War Junk       —        —                   —             150,000 SP     150,000 SP




                                                                                                      111
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                2
       Before: The vessel is moving with the prevailing winds.

       Skill Modifier: The modifier to the Boating or Shiphandling skill imposed by the
       winds. This modifier is in addition to the modifiers of the ship itself and any others the
       Games Master feels are appropriate.

       Rowing and Wind
                                                                                           Skill
       Wind Speed    Against                            Before                             Modifier
       Calm          —                                  —                                  —
       Light Wind    —                                  —                                  —
       Moderate      Slight Adversity (–25% Speed)      Slight Adversity (–25% Speed)      —
       Wind
       Stiff Wind    Slight Adversity (–25% Speed)      Slight Adversity (–25% Speed)      –10%
       Fresh Gale    Moderate Adversity (–50% Speed)    Moderate Adversity (–50% Speed)    –20%
       Full Gale     Great Adversity (–75% Speed)       Great Adversity (–75% Speed)       –40%
       Hurricane     *                                  *                                  –60%

       * Rowing vessels cannot make headway in a hurricane.


       Sailing
       Sails offer some significant advantages over rowing. A sailing ship requires a much
       smaller crew, for example, and the ship relies on wind, rather than broad backs, for its
       propulsion.

       The speed of a sailing ship depends upon the angle of the wind in relation to the ship,
       as well as the speed of the wind itself. For the sake of simplicity, these rules incorporate
       four wind directions: before the wind, quarter wind, half wind and head wind.

       Before the Wind: The wind is coming directly from the stern of the ship toward the
       bow.

       Quarter Wind: The wind is blowing against one of the ship’s rear quarters, at a roughly
       45 degree angle to the length of the ship.

       Half Wind: The wind is blowing across the ship, at a roughly 90 degree angle to the
       length of the ship.

       Head Wind: The wind is blowing directly from the bow of the ship toward the stern.

       The Sailing Speed table gives the speed a sailing ship will travel under different wind
       speeds, presented in the following manner: Speed per Combat Action / Speed per 12
       hour period. The rules assume all sailing ships travel at roughly the same speed, the
       heavier ships using more sails to offset their weight. In the event of one ship chasing
       another, the outcome of the race will depend upon the Boating or Shiphandling skills
       of the captains of either ship, just as with any other pursuit in Legend.


 112
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                          2
         Ship Qualities: Optional Rule
         To add character to a ship, qualities can be used. These are quirks of a ship’s design that
         improve or hinder its performance. It is impossible to add or remove a quality from a
         ship; they are simply part of the way it is.

         Agile:      +10% to all Shiphandling Battleshy:       –10% to all Gunnery tests
                     tests in battle
         Defiant:    +10% to all Gunnery tests Clumsy:         –10% to all Shiphandling tests in battle
         Good:       +5% to all Crew Checks    Cursed:         Games Master may force crew to re-roll
                                                               one successful Crew check per day
         Lucky:      Re-roll one failed Crew    Distinctive:   –10% to all Shiphandling tests to avoid
                     check per day                             detection
         Nimble:     +10% to all Shiphandling Fragile:         –1 Hull
                     tests; –0.5m draft
         Reliable:   +10% to all Shiphandling Foul:            +10% to all Crew Resilience tests
                     tests
         Stealthy:   +10% to all Shiphandling Ill:             –5% to all Crew Checks
                     tests to avoid detection
         Sturdy:     +1 Hull                    Unreliable:    –10% to all Shiphandling tests
         Sweet:      +10% to all Crew           Slow:          –2m/–2 km movement
                     Resilience tests
         Swift:      +2m/+2 km Movement         Sluggish:      –10% to all Shiphandling tests; +0.5m
                                                               draft


         A Day at Sea
         Each 12 hour period spent sailing or boating, the captain of a ship must test his
         Shiphandling (or Boating) skill. If the test is successful, the ship makes it through the
         day’s travel without incident. If the captain fails his Shiphandling Skill Test, the ship’s
         Seaworthiness is reduced by a single point.


         Vessel Damage
         A ship can meet its end in one of two ways. A ship that loses all its Seaworthiness points
         will begin taking on water at a rate faster than the water can be expelled, causing it to
         sink. A ship may also be destroyed through the loss of all its Structure Points as a result
         of damage from weather and enemies.


         Seaworthiness
         All ships are fashioned from timber and nails, and all of them continually take on
         water. The question is exactly how much water. Bailing water from a ship’s bilge is a
         normal part of a sailor’s daily duties and larger ships always carry at least one carpenter
         (and spare lumber) to make emergency repairs when needed.



                                                                                                          113
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                    2
       So long as a ship has at least one Seaworthiness point remaining, the water comes into
       the ship at a slower rate than it is expelled by the actions of the crew. One the ship’s
       Seaworthiness falls to zero, its day is done. The vessel will begin to swamp, a process
       that takes one Combat Round for every metre of the ship’s length. When a ship is fully
       swamped, it will sink.

       Every time a ship suffers five or more points of structural damage from a single attack
       (after the Hull has been deducted), reduce the Seaworthiness of the ship by one point
       per five points of damage.

       For Example: The Dark Endeavour, a longship caught in a vicious sea-battle, is rammed
       by a vengeful trireme. This causes 15 points of damage, reduced to 12 once the longship’s
       Hull has been deducted. The attack also reduces the Dark Endeavour’s Seaworthiness by
       2 points.


       Structure Points
       Ships take damage from a variety of sources – the lashing winds of a terrible storm or
       the merciless ram of an attacking warship. A ship’s Structure Points are exactly like a
       human’s Hit Points, just as a ship’s hull is exactly like a human’s armour. Any incoming
       blow is first compared to the ship’s current Hull rating. If the damage is less than or
       equal to the Hull rating, the blow causes no damage. If it is greater, the hull’s rating
       is subtracted from the damage. Any damage remaining is deducted from the ship’s
       Structure Points.

       If a ship’s Structure Points are ever reduced to zero, the ship immediately begins to
       break apart. What remains is useful only as life rafts for the surviving crew.


       Dangers
       The sea is a dangerous place to be. Even without the potential dangers of enemy ships,
       monsters and pirates, threats such as storms and fires can imperil a ship.


       Careening
       The warm waters of many oceans are a paradise for weeds, worms and other parasites,
       and a ship will quickly find itself befouled by all manner of things clinging to its
       lower hull. These weeds create drag, slowing a ship down considerably. A wise captain,
       therefore, will careen his vessel regularly, to keep it moving swiftly and smoothly
       through the ocean.

       Each week of sailing, roll 1D6. On a 6, then the ship’s speed drops by three metres/two
       kilometres until it is careened.

       To careen a ship, it must be beached or put into a dock. The crew then scrape the
       bottom clear of debris. This takes 1D3 days and a successful Shiphandling check. Each
       successful attempt at careening brings the ship’s speed back up by three metres/two
       kilometres.

 114
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                       2
         Fire
         Small fires are very common aboard ships, though they are always carefully contained.
         A fire that escapes control is, however, a real danger to a ship. If not extinguished, an
         uncontrolled fire aboard a ship will grow one size category every 2D6 minutes.

         The ship’s Hull rating does not protect it against fire damage, though the fire will certainly
         damage the ship. Every Combat Round during which the fire rages, the Games Master
         should roll damage dice and apply the damage directly to the ship’s Structure Points.


         Monsters
         There are creatures in the briny deep larger and stronger than anything found on land.
         Most sea creatures will not attack a ship on the open sea unless they are controlled or
         starving – a ship is very large and very unappetising, after all. Naturally, if the people
         aboard the ship are busily lobbing harpoons at the beast, it will likely decide to either
         flee or make them stop.


         Running Aground
         Reefs and sandbars spell the doom for more ships than any pirate. If an unexpected
         reef lies ahead on the ship’s course, then the lookout is permitted a Perception test to
         notice the reef, and then the helmsman may make a Shiphandling test to avoid it. If
         this fails, then the ship risks running aground. Roll 1D6 x (1D6–2) for the depth of
         the reef below the water (if the result is negative, then the reef actually pokes above the
         surface). The ship takes 3D4 points of Structural damage and loses an equal amount
         of Seaworthiness for every metre of the ship’s draft that strikes the reef. For example, if
         a ship with a draft of five metres runs into a reef that is three metres below the surface,
         then it takes 6D4 damage. If the ship is still seaworthy, then it can possibly be floated
         off the reef at high tide by lightening it.


         Storms
         Greater than monsters, greater than fire, the most terrible danger facing a ship at sea is
         the weather. Much like monsters, storms occur as part of the Games Master’s plot for
         the Legend session. The wind and the sea combine to strike at the tossing ship with a
         primal fury, as masts creak and crack in the gale, leaks spray water into the hold and
         cargo bursts its ties to tumble about the storm-wracked deck.

         For a ship to survive a storm intact, the captain must employ his Shiphandling skill (or
         Boating skill, as appropriate) to keep the vessel steady and turned into the storm. If the
         Skill Test is successful, the ship endures one hour of storm weather at a cost of only one
         Seaworthiness. If the Skill Test fails, the ship endures one hour of storm weather at a
         cost 1D6 Seaworthiness.


         Naval Equipment and Personnel
         It has often been said that a boat is a hole in the water you must fill with money.
         Although Legend streamlines the process of buying and repairing ships immensely,
         Adventurers will find that owning their own ship is an expensive undertaking.
                                                                                                          115
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                    2
       Like any other item, the cost for ships and their equipment varies from place to place. Most
       of the larger ships are unavailable in any settlement size smaller than a small city. As with all
       equipment, the costs given for ships in the descriptions are the small city prices. Rams and
       engines cannot be acquired outside of a small or large city.


       Personnel
       Unlike equipment, ship personnel do not vary in price from place-to-place. Each
       shipboard job has a standard daily pay rate, which the personnel will expect, whether
       they are hired in a small village or a great city.

       Ship Personnel
       Position          Daily Pay
       Navigator         15 SP
       Oarsmaster        12 SP
       Officer           18 SP
       Rower             4 SP (or free if slaves)
       Sailor            8 SP


       Weapons
       This section deals with various shipboard weapons. Of course, there are a vast number
       of items needed to operate a ship effectively and efficiently, but such things as rope,
       sailcloth and other sundries are included in the costs for maintenance and repair of a
       ship.

       Arbalest, Siege: A siege arbalest is essentially a large crossbow. Serviceable by one man,
       it takes a full minute to load and requires a stand to support it. The bolts fired from an
       arbalest are too big to be affected by the Common Magic spell Multimissile.

       Ballista: A ballista is a much larger and deadlier version of the arbalest, requiring at
       least three men to crew it. The bolts fired from an arbalest are too big to be affected by
       the Common Magic spell Multimissile.


       Cannon
                                                           Crew     Shots/ton
       Weapon            Skill        Damage Range         Required of Ammo Load             Cost
       9-pound           Gunnery      4D6    100m          1        50        Special        5,000 SP
       (demi-culverin)
       18-pound          Gunnery      4D8           80m    2          25          Special    10,000 SP
       (culverin)
       24-pound          Gunnery      4D12          100m   2          15          Special    13,000 SP
       (demi-cannon)
       45-pound          Gunnery      4D20          80m    3          10          Special    25,000 SP
       (cannon)
       Swivel Gun        Gunnery      3D6           50m    1          50          5 rounds 3,000 SP


 116
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                               2
         Cannon: There are several sizes of cannon used on board ships. There are also swivel
         guns, which are smaller pieces mounted on the deck of a ship, and are used to blast
         smaller boats or for precise shooting. See the Cannon table for more details.

         Reloading Cannons: The time it takes to reload a cannon depends on the operator’s
         Gunnery skill.

                               Combat Actions to          Number of Crew Combat rounds
         Gunnery Skill         reload (character scale)   to reload (Crew Combat scale)
         <25%                  25                         1D6
         26%-50%               20                         1D4
         51-75%                15                         1D3
         76%-100%              10                         1D2
         101%+                 5                          1

         Ram: A ram is a heavy metal spike attached to the front of a warship, used to stave in
         the hulls of enemy ships. A ram differs in size and price depending upon the kind of
         ship it will be attached to. If a ram is included in the ship’s construction, it increases
         the ship’s price by 10%. If it is added later, the additional work needed to reinforce the
         ship’s structure will raise the ram’s price to 15% of the ship’s original purchase price.

         Springal: The springal is a small catapult, designed to lob its ammunition in an arc
         at the enemy. The ammunition fired from a springal is too big to be affected by the
         Common Magic spell Multimissile.

         Ship/Siege Weapons
                               Damage                  STR/     Combat                AP/
         Weapon Damage         Modifier   Range   Load DEX Size Manoeuvres        ENC HP Cost
         Siege    2D6+4        N          200m    4    12/10 E  Impale,           6   6/12 800 SP
         Arbalest                                               Sunder
         Ballista 4D6+2        N          200m    6    12/11 E  Impale,           10     6/14 1,200 SP
                                                                Sunder
         Springal 2D10+2       N          250m    4    10/10 E  Bash, Sunder      12     6/12 1,000 SP


         Repair
         One thing is certain about a ship – it will always be in need of repair. Ships lose
         Seaworthiness as part of their normal operation, wear and tear that must be attended
         to eventually. In addition to this is the damage to a ship’s Structure Points that occur
         through combat.

         Cost of Repair
         For the sake of simplicity, all the various items needed for repairing a ship, from
         sailcloth to tar to cured timber, are bundled together into basic prices. A ship requires
         10 Silvers worth of materials to repair every lost point of Seaworthiness. Repairing lost
         Structure Points requires 100 Silvers worth of materials for every point.

                                                                                                      117
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                2
       Repair Crews
       A standard repair crew can repair ten points of Seaworthiness or four Structure Points
       per day on a beached or dry docked ship. A repair crew consists of the ship’s carpenter
       and five men under his direct supervision. For every crew member less than five
       decreases the amount of repair done by 10% (round up), for each additional member
       of the repair crew the totals are increased by 10% (round down).

       If he is working alone, a ship’s carpenter can repair three points of Seaworthiness or one
       structure point per day on a beached or dry docked ship.


       Repairs at Sea
       Many ship captains wisely carry repair materials and a carpenter on board their
       ship at all times, in order to make emergency repairs after (or during) a storm or
       engagement with a monster or enemy ship.

       While at sea, it is extremely hard to repair damage. Any Craft (Woodworking) Skill
       Tests suffer a –40% penalty.

       When attempting to repair a ship at sea, the carpenter must attempt a Craft
       (Woodworking) Skill Test every 12 hours. Success indicates he has repaired one
       lost point of lost Seaworthiness or one structure point. This can be increased by an
       additional +1d4 points if there are sufficient crewmen available to form a work squad.

       If the ship’s carpenter fails his Craft (Woodworking) Skill Test, no repairs are made but
       the supplies used in the attempt are still consumed.


       Dry Docks
       Aside from magic (which offers near immediate repair), dry docking a ship is the best
       way to repair it. A dry dock is normally only available in small cities or larger and cost
       50 Silver per day to rent (or 100 Silver per day in a large city).


       Beaching a Ship
       Beaching a ship is normally only done in the most dire circumstances. Canoes, rowboats
       and rafts can be beached with impunity, although even they have a 25% chance of
       losing a point of Seaworthiness when they do so.

       Beaching other ships requires the crew to make a Shiphandling or Boating test with a
       penalty of between 0% and 100%, depending upon the suitability of the beach and the
       time chosen. If the ship is carefully sailed into shallow waters, then slowly rolled onto
       its side by moving cargo and other weight, then the penalty is lessened. Sailing onto the
       shore in the teeth of a fierce storm incurs a much bigger penalty. Success on this test
       merely results in the ship losing 1D6 Seaworthiness and 1D6 Structure Points. Failure
       results in the ship losing its draft x D10 (minimum of 1D10) in both Seaworthiness and
       Structure Points, as the ship effectively crashes into the shore.


 118
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                        2
         BEASTS & COHORTS
         Mounts, beasts of burden and other animals are covered in this chapter. Whilst most
         Adventurers are going to be concerned with animals that help them get from one place
         to another, or a mount to ride into battle, the necessity for domesticated animals in
         more mundane, everyday pursuits (ploughing, carting and so on) are also covered here.
         So too are pets – either as companions or as familiars for magic-using professions.


         Beasts, Pets and Steeds
         This section offers descriptions of a variety of living creatures for Adventurers to
         purchase in the course of their travels. Some are as common as a mule or draft horse;
         others might be a bit more unusual, such as a trollish watch beetle.

         The Beasts, Pets and Steeds table shows a large variety of animals available for
         purchase (if the Games Master allows). Each entry includes the animal and three costs
         – untrained, basic trained and skilled:

         Untrained: An untrained animal will need to be trained by the owner or an expert in
         that particular field. Training an animal is handled in the same way as any construction
         project with the trainer using the Lore (Animal) skill to train the beast. The Task Round
         is two weeks and the best starts as Untrained. Each 25% contributes to the training
         level: 50% is Basic Trained, 75% is Skilled and 100% or more is Battle Trained. Battle
         Training is only necessary where an animal will be used in combat or warfare; otherwise
         the training does not need to go that far.

         Basic Trained: An animal that has been basic trained knows that the buyer is its new
         master and will obey several basic commands, making it much easier to get along with
         as a pet or mount. There is no bonus or penalty to any Skill Tests concerning the animal
         at all but it cannot be used for combat or battle and, if the creature is placed under any
         undue stress, then the owner suffers a –20% penalty to appropriate Skill Tests.

         Skilled: Any animal that is considered Skilled has received and integrated a good
         amount of its training, and will respond generally how the owner commands in most
         situations. There is a +10% bonus to any Lore (Animal), Ride and Drive Skill Tests
         concerning the animal. The creature cannot be used in combat or battle.

         Battle Trained: The animal has been conditioned for high-stress situations and can be
         used as a war-mount or other resource in combat and conflict. The owner suffers no
         penalties using the beast in these conditions.



                                                                                                      119
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                2
       Creature Descriptions
       Baboon: Baboons are large, ground-dwelling monkeys.

       Bear, Brown: Large and powerful omnivores, bears come in a variety of breeds, colours
       and demeanours. The common brown bear is the most common across a multitude of
       terrain types and has been ‘domesticated’ by several cultures.

       Beetle, Giant: The largest beetles known, these creatures are commonly domesticated
       by trolls and put to use as pack animals and mounts.

       Bull/Cattle/Oxen: This rather large grouping contains all of the bovine species.

       Cat: This is a basic, domesticated house or alley cat. Cats come in a vast variety of
       colours, fur lengths and even general size. Good as wizardly familiars and adequately
       intelligent, cats are a fantastic way to get rid of small vermin and scare off small
       predators from a house or farm.

       Crocodile: These large reptiles are an ancient species and almost always live near
       swamps, marshes and rivers.

       Deer: Dwelling mostly in fringe areas and forested terrains, common deer are a fantastic
       source for leather-quality hide and a very healthy meat (venison).

       Dog: This is a broad category that covers a wide number of canine species that are
       commonly kept as pets.

       Dog, War: This contains large, muscular breeds that have long and broad muzzles good
       for gripping and pulling. They have the same statistics as a normal dog but with an
       Bite skill of 65%, a Evade of 60%, STR 14, SIZ 12 and the ability to inflict 1D6+1D2
       damage on a bite.

       Elephant: Exceptionally large pachyderms with thick, wrinkled grey skin, elephants
       are some of the largest land animals in existence.

       Fowl: This is a very broad category of game and food birds like chickens (which are not
       actually fowl), ducks, geese, pheasant and others like them. They are useful for their
       eggs and their meat, and some people use their feathers or bones for crafts. Otherwise
       they are strictly used as resource animals.

       Goat: Among the most common farm animals in many cultures, goats have been used
       for their milk, meat and even wool in some breeds. They are easily handled and are
       relatively long-lived, meaning that a farmer can get the most out of a single goat before
       having to put it to the blade. Goats tend to have hard and pointed horns on top of their
       heads that can deliver a jarring blow if the goat can rear back a slight bit before butting.
       Should a goat actually manage to butt someone with its horns (25%) the target will
       not suffer any real damage but must pass an Athletics test to keep his balance or topple
       from the impact.
 120
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                          2
         Griffin: Highly prized as a mount, a griffin is a large flying carnivore with the body of a
         lion and the head, talons and wings of a great eagle. There are several subspecies known
         to exist, such as the panther/raven or the snow tiger/owl combinations found in remote
         jungles and mountains respectively.

         Hawk/Falcon: This is another group entry for any number of predatory birds that
         could be trained for falconry.

         Horse, Draft: The largest horse breeds available, draft horses are immense equines that
         are best used for heavy labour. They do not have bodies built for anything much other
         than power, as they can pull several times their own weight with no problem, and have
         near limitless endurance. Although they can be trained for combat situations, draft
         horses are not suited for rapid movement or manoeuvring, making them less effective
         steeds for combat-prone Adventurers. They are far better suited for hauling or pulling
         wagons, carts and vehicles.

         Horse, Pack: Caught somewhere between draft horses and riding horses, pack horses
         are often the result of awkward breeding or uncommonly thick foals. They are not
         as agile as riding horses and nowhere near as strong or large as draft horses, making
         them best suited for use as carry-alls. Able to support a great deal of weight and keep
         a decent pace alongside other horses, pack horses are similar to mules in disposition
         and practicality. Owners of pack horses rarely ride them unless it is the only option, as
         their raised shoulders and bony flanks rarely make for a comfortable ride. Pack horses
         are very useful for groups of Adventurers who do not have access to a cart or wagon, as
         they can carry considerable weight without slowing.

         Horse, Riding: This is the standard horse seen under most Adventurers. A class of
         horse that ranges in colour, temperament, fur length and even size to a degree, riding
         horses are easily the most commonly found horses throughout Legend. Usable in a
         variety of tasks that they will do well at, riding horses are decidedly average compared
         to the rest of their species.

         Horse, War: Large chargers, war horses are cut from physically powerful yet still agile
         breeds to be used in battle. They are shown from a very early age that they can inflict
         terrible damage with their thick, iron-shod hooves, and must not shy away from getting
         cut or bludgeoned – as it will likely happen a great deal when the rider commits them
         to battle. They tend to have short manes and cropped tails to keep from getting caught
         up in weapons or armour, and many are commonly fitted with some form of barding.
         They have the same statistics as a normal horses but with a Kick skill of 65%, STR 30,
         SIZ 30 and the ability to inflict 1D8+1D12 damage on a kick.

         Lion/Lioness: Nicknamed ‘the king of the jungle’ even though its primary territories
         are savannah and plains areas, the lion has been a symbol of royalty and nobility for as
         long as the idea has existed.

         Lizard, Giant: These creatures are used as mounts by certain nomads, giant lizards are
         large carnivores.
                                                                                                       121
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                 2
       Mammoth: These beasts are immense herbivores that are the ancestors of common
       elephants.

       Mule: The infertile offspring of a male horse or pony and a female donkey, the mule
       was originally one of nature’s little accidents that created a new tool for the world to
       use. Mules are domesticated extremely easily, and are good pack animals for those who
       cannot afford a proper horse or pony. They are occasionally noisy, ornery and tend
       to bite at handlers they are unfamiliar with. Smaller than horses but slightly larger
       than most ponies, mules have wiry fur and bristly manes between their longer ears.
       They tend to be grey or brownish, but red mules have been known to exist when both
       parents were of a richer colour. For all general purposes, treat a mule as you would a
       pony, but with the carrying capacity of a riding horse.

       Panther: One of the larger great hunting cats, the term ‘panther’ is normally used to
       describe a black cougar, jaguar or leopard – though there are other different types of
       great cat in this category.

       Pig: This is the commonplace swine that dominates farms across the many worlds of
       Legend. There have been farms dedicated to the raising, breeding and slaughtering of
       pigs for as long as there have been livestock farmers. Pigs are easy to raise and upkeep,
       and can be fed the leftovers from the family’s own supper plates, including rinds, bones
       and unwanted grease! In fact, a group of hungry pigs will gladly eat anything thrown
       into their feeding troughs – including humanoid bodies! They eat flesh, hair and bone
       equally well and rather quickly, making large groups of pigs useful for getting rid of
       incriminating evidence, should the watch be looking for a body!

       Pigeon, Homing: A homing pigeon will return to the roost no matter how far away
       it strays. These pigeons can deliver small scrolls of sensitive information to faraway
       recipients. Once released, a homing pigeon has a 95% chance of returning to its roost
       barring any outside interference and will travel 3D10x10 kilometres daily to do so.

       Pony: What is basically a smaller breed of horse, true ponies are drastically shorter and
       thinner than common riding horses. They make good mounts and steeds for smaller
       races or children and can be used in cities as low-weight pack animals.

       Rhino: Large, thick and somewhat dim-witted, the rhinoceros is a massive quadruped
       with one or two long horns sprouting up from its leathery snout. Although herbivorous,
       rhinos can be extremely aggressive and downright angry toward trespassers into their
       surroundings. With a proper bucking of that horned head or a full charge, a rhino can
       easily kill even an armoured target with a single spearing strike.

       Rodent, Common: This is a very large group of animals that includes rats, mice,
       shrews and most other small and commonplace rodents (including rabbits). Rodents
       are rarely used for anything other than a food source for larger animals, or perhaps as
       a wizardly familiar or tiny companion. Rodents are moderately intelligent and can be
       taught tricks if rewarded properly. Even though some ‘rodents’ are not actually rodents
       at all, such as shrews and moles, they are still lumped in with the more common
       category for the ease of the seller.
 122
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                       2
         Sheep: One of the early livestock choices for hilly and grassland terrains, sheep are
         raised in huge flocks to be used for wool and meat. They are commonly kept in massive
         flocks of over 100 sheep by individual shepherds, who often keep them in line using
         specially trained dogs. Rams are included in this category as well as common sheep, as
         they are generally used for the same types of resources – save that ram’s wool is a bit
         harsher and rams are commonly equipped with thick horns similar to those of a goat.

         Snake: This is a broad category of non-venomous snakes that can be caught or bred for
         sale. From constrictors to harmless vermin-catchers, snakes have been a fascination for
         most cultures and a source of great fear for others – sometimes both. Adventurers tend
         to be on the eccentric and unique side, so an animal breeder who has access to snakes
         and serpents might be surprised to see the number of them he can sell. Whether used as
         a pet, familiar or even to be released in a barn or cottage to rid the area of rats or mice,
         snakes can be quite useful.

         Snake, Venomous: This group category is far rarer to see at a common pet shop, as these
         serpents are all of the venomous variety. Cobras, vipers, sea snakes and so forth are all
         quite dangerous to others, and few would ever risk carrying one as a commodity. Sold
         as familiars or as living weapons for unruly assassins, venomous snakes are extremely
         dangerous to handle. Even if trained fully, a venomous snake is likely to strike at a fast-
         moving object reaching for it. Should the Games Master request it, a venomous snake
         will strike at anything brought quickly into range of its fangs, unless a difficult (–20%)
         Lore (Animal) Skill Test is passed.

         Spider: While not a very common pet or companion, there are hundreds of species
         of spiders throughout the Legend worlds that could be bottled up and sold. There
         are terribly venomous species like the brown recluse or the thick-fanged bird-eating
         spider that can be as large as a dinner plate. Many times, a spider is bought as a spell
         component or ritual implement, although others might wish to have a spider on hand
         for their own reasons. For whatever reason an Adventurer might buy a common spider,
         the cost listed includes a proper jar, jug or box used to transport the arachnid.

         Spider, Giant: Although the most common giant spider encountered is a web-spinner
         that entraps Adventurers as a source of food, there are other breeds that could be
         theoretically trained as all-terrain mounts. Although very difficult to train, a giant
         tarantula or wolf spider could make an amazingly efficient steed. With a modified
         saddle, a rider could be taken up walls or ceilings or even across spun-web bridges with
         ease.

         Tiger: Easily among the largest of the great cats, a tiger is a solitary hunter when not
         with young, preferring to move alone through its territory in search of prey. Only
         a viable mount for the extremely small and thin, tigers are often only purchased as
         guardians of holy places or gladiatorial animals.

         Wolf: Wild canines running in packs that can reach upwards of twenty individuals,
         wolves are the quintessential pack hunters. Wolves are quite loyal after reaching the
         ‘Skilled’ training level and will view the handler as a pack mate. For this reason, if
                                                                                                        123
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                  2
       Beasts, Pets and Steeds                                    nothing    else,    wolves
       Animal             Untrained   Basic Trained   Skilled     make good adventuring
       Baboon             75 Sp       125 SP          200 SP      companions, if given the
       Bear, Brown        200 SP      400 SP          800 SP      right amount of training.
       Beetle, Giant      250 SP      300 SP          350 SP
                                                                  Zebra: An equine animal
       Bull/Cattle/Oxen   150 SP      200 SP          250 SP
                                                                  very similar to a pack horse,
       Cat                1 SP        2 SP            3 SP
                                                                  only faster and far more
       Crocodile          50 SP       100 SP          300 SP
                                                                  ill-tempered, the zebra is
       Deer               10 SP       50 SP           100 SP      a black and white striped
       Dog, Domestic      1 SP        2 SP            3 SP        creature that has always
       Dog, Hunting       10 SP       25 SP           35 SP       drawn attention. Zebras
       Dog, War           20 SP       40 SP           60 SP       are captured for their
       Elephant           2,000 SP    5,000 SP        7,500 SP    meat by some savannah
       Fowl               1 SP        3 SP            —           cultures and some even
       Goat               50 SP       75 SP           100 SP      to be broken and trained
       Griffin            2,500 SP    6,000 SP        10,000 SP   as mounts. It is for their
       Hawk/Falcon        150 SP      400 SP          600 SP
                                                                  exotic look that some
                                                                  people try to keep zebras
       Horse, Draft       150 SP      400 SP          450 SP
                                                                  for their own uses but
       Horse, Pack        100 SP      300 SP          350 SP
                                                                  they do not make the best
       Horse, Riding      125 SP      350 SP          400SP       mounts or companions due
       Horse, War         175 SP      400 SP          500 SP      to their ornery natures.
       Lion/Lioness       500 SP      1,000 SP        1,350 SP
       Lizard, Giant      350 SP      600 SP          800 SP
       Mammoth            2,500 SP    6,000 SP        8,500 SP    Hired
       Mule
       Panther
                          50 SP
                          450 SP
                                      125 SP
                                      850 SP
                                                      200 SP
                                                      1,000 SP
                                                                  Companions
       Pig                50 SP       60 SP           80 SP       and Cohorts
       Pigeon, Homing     25 SP       50 SP           —           This section covers a slew of
       Pony               80 SP       175 SP          225 SP      professionals that a common
       Rhino              3,000 SP    4,000 SP        8,000 SP    Legend Adventurer could
       Rodent, Common     5 CP        1 SP            4 SP        hire for an extended period
       Sea Lion           50 SP       100 SP          250 SP      of time in order to perform
       Sheep              30 SP       40 SP           60 SP       some duty. The Hirelings
       Snake              50 SP       100 SP          200 SP      and Cohorts table on pages
       Snake, Venomous    250 SP      500 SP          750 SP      136-139 includes each
       Spider             1 SP        2 SP            10 SP
                                                                  profession’s title, the primary
                                                                  and secondary skills of those
       Spider, Giant      200 SP      400 SP          500 SP
                                                                  who follow the profession,
       Tiger              500 SP      1,100 SP        1,500 SP
                                                                  their general aptitude and
       Wolf               200 SP      300 SP          400 SP
                                                                  the cost to hire them per day
       Zebra              300 SP      350 SP          400 SP      or use of service.




 124
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                        2
         Accountant: This is someone who specialises in taking care of his employer’s money,
         resources and overall assets. Accountants are also excellent at taking care of large
         purchases in their employers’ names, such as a general sending his accountant to
         purchase new shields for his troops.

         Acolyte: Learned in the ways of religion and wonder, an acolyte is a member of a faith
         devoted to the higher mysteries and miracles wielded by its highest members. Acolytes
         tend to be willing to work for a pittance, as long as their work furthers the goals of the
         cult or temple.

         Advisor: Advisors are expected to have and express their opinions on all manners of
         subjects for their employers. Many advisors are specialised in their knowledge but most
         claim to be very well educated and versed in several topics. After all, a wide range of
         knowledge makes them far more valuable.

         Alchemist: This is a group of professions revolving around the use of chemicals, herbs
         and minerals to create mixtures for a variety of purposes. From common scented oils
         and relaxing salves to near-mystic potions that cure diseases and stave off infection,
         alchemist goods are as numerous as the ingredients they mix them from.

         Animal Trainer: Terribly useful for the Adventurer who wants a special mount or
         companion but who does not have the time, patience or skill to train it themselves,
         animal trainers are well suited for teaching a beast who is its real master. Using rewards,
         playtime and even physical punishment at times, these hard-working folk make their
         animals respect or fear them.

         Apothecary: This is a general healer of ailments and minor wounds, skilled in the use
         of salts, minerals and tinctures to mend flesh and banish sickness. Apothecaries are not
         exceptionally skilled in deeper wounds or issues, but a quick stop in an apothecary shop
         can fill an Adventurer’s pouch with an assortment of useful goods.

         Armourer: An offshoot of the common blacksmith, an armourer specialises in the
         creation, repair and modification of armour. Although only responsible for the grommets
         and bindings for leather armour, a good armourer retains those types of goods as well.
         Many armourers also take orders for barding as well as armour for individuals.

         Barber: A combination of personal grooming and dentistry, a barber’s skills are diverse
         and often sought out by Adventurers who do not get to see civilisation often. Barbers
         do many things, from giving someone a haircut and a good shave, to providing a hot
         towel and ripping out that rotten tooth that got chipped in a fight a month earlier.
         They tend to be popular people in secluded areas, even if aspects of their trade seem
         like an unnecessary luxuries.




                                                                                                       125
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                 2
       Barkeep: Barkeeps are professional bartenders, most often in charge of pubs or taverns.
       Useful for more than filling bellies, a barkeep can also be a source of good advice from
       many long nights of listening to patrons tell their tales. Having a good barkeep on the
       payroll could be a great way for an Adventurer to spread rumours or information without
       being directly involved. The counterpart to a barkeep, the bar wench is a common serving
       maid. She is always watching the happenings in her tavern room, and is a good source of
       information that might not reach the ears of some patrons or outsiders.

       Blacksmith: The quintessential forger of common metal goods, a blacksmith is anyone
       who operates a forge and hammers out metallic objects. There are several different
       varieties of blacksmiths, some who specialise in iron and steel and others who are
       only proficient in copper or bronze. A lot of what a blacksmith can forge is up to
       the resources and advancement of the culture he is a part of. A blacksmith is the best
       professional to go to for armour and weapon repairs when a specialist is not available,
       as the basics are close to the same for all smithy work at that level.

       Bowman: This category of soldier who specialises in ranged combat includes archers
       and crossbowmen. Bowmen are commonly hired in units of 10-20 and they almost
       always come prepared with their own weaponry.

       Bowyer: This is the artisan responsible for the creation of bows and crossbows. Bowyers
       carve, treat and bend the wood for bow-type weaponry, attaching the proper additional
       implements to create the finished product.

       Brewer: Specialists at creating alcoholic beverages from a variety of spices, grains and
       fruits, brewers form a group of some of the most beloved artisans in society. They are
       the makers of ale, spirits, grog and some rarer liquor and those goods go a very long
       way in most cultures.

       Burglar: There may come a time where an Adventurer needs something stolen or
       reclaimed for him and in those cases it can be best if he has someone else do it. Hired
       burglars may not be the most trustworthy louts but most are happy to earn their wage
       in exchange for whatever bauble or trinket they had to pilfer.

       Butcher: This is the bloody-handed labourer who takes livestock, fowl and game and
       turns them into the various meats that fill the stew pots and stoves of the world. A
       butcher is an expert at removing bones, hooves and scales from beasts in order to get to
       the meat beneath or in order to save the resources provided by the animal at the time
       of its slaughter.

       Butler/Page: A general manservant that runs the basic needs of a household, a butler
       (adult) or page (adolescent) is a must have for any large manor or estate. These
       employees take care of many of a household’s common practices, such as laundry and
       cleaning, or even the selection of everyday clothing and activities.

       Carpenter: This is the professional responsible for woodworking and other wood crafts.
       From toys and tools to the walls of a house, carpenters are the masters of woodcraft.

 126
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                      2
         Adventurers can also occasionally find carpenters who make the basic wooden bodies
         of shields, but they are far more commonly going to sell such items to armourers.

         Cartographer: In charge of writing, deciphering and translating maps, cartographers
         are very useful to those Adventurers about to travel into unknown territory. A good
         map can be worth more than the cartographer’s weight in gold and he is well aware of
         the importance of his skill.

         Cavalryman: This is a hired soldier that specialises in mounted combat. With a
         charging blow from his lance or horseman’s flail he can send infantry reeling. Little else
         can be considered faster on a battlefield.

         Chandler: Masters of crafting with wax, chandlers are best known for their skill at
         making candles and lamp mantles. They can also be fantastic sources for raw beeswax,
         which has dozens of uses outside of simple light source manufacture.

         Chef: This employee takes culinary ability to a new level each time he sets spice to pan
         and pan to fire. Able to create masterpieces that are as tasty as they are beautiful, chefs
         are normally reserved for high-class or noble establishments. Rarely can Adventurers
         afford the types of dishes they create but those with the treasure-laden pockets of the
         successful can indulge in them if they wish to!

         Clerk: As common store or sales clerks, these men and women are the foot soldiers in
         the eternal war for commerce. They are the front lines of the businesses, able to talk
         about their products with passers-by and explain exactly why everyone needs one of
         what they are selling. In addition to their selling duties, clerks also need to keep a sharp
         eye out for shoplifters and con men looking to make a profit out of their own.

         Cobbler: One of the most treasured but least thanked professions, cobblers make sure
         that their customers have shoes and boots on their feet. Makers of all sorts of footwear,
         they are rarely pressed to sell any shoe ‘off the rack’ due to individual fitting needs.

         Coinsmith: This profession only exists in societies that use minted coins, as this
         craftsman is responsible for pressing the proper amounts of precious metals into them.
         Less exacting than a metalsmith who deals in the same types of metals, but far more
         precise in the original moulding, a coinsmith must make sure that the ruling force
         backing the coin he is pressing is happy with the results.

         Cook: Another wielder of the culinary arts, a cook is a basic preparer of foodstuffs. Cooks
         are good at turning staple foods into full meals using special seasonings and spices in
         combination with crafty cooking methods. Some cooks might specialise in certain foods
         or dishes but most will make do with whatever they are given to work with.

         Cooper: A much specialised version of a carpenter, coopers make barrels, tuns and
         kegs. They are responsible for bending, treating and binding wooden, liquid-storage
         containers. It is their work that keeps a stout lager from leeching sweetness from maple
         boards, or makes sure a good batch of bitters does not go sour due to a lack of waxed lids.
                                                                                                        127
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                  2
       Courier: This is a hireling responsible for taking messages or packages from one place
       to another.

       Courtier: As a socialite and a diplomat, a courtier excels at getting his point across in
       subtle and polite ways. A good courtier will sway opinions and objections to the way of
       his employer without anyone realising he has done so.

       Delegate: Simply put, this person is sent to some official meeting or similar event
       to acts as an extension of his employer’s voice. Delegates are paid to say or represent
       something very specific on behalf of their employer and they do not stray from their
       course unless they do not wish to work as a delegate ever again.

       Doctor: Doctors are not put off by severed digits or cleft muscles, and do everything in
       their power to mend flesh and save lives. Some doctors also deal with mental disorders
       or anxieties, but those are farther and fewer apart.

       Driver: Also called a teamster, a driver is skilled at handling teams of animals that are
       drawing some kind of vehicle. Most adept at wagon and carriage driving, there are also
       some specialised drivers that use dog sleds or other vehicles.

       Dyer: This is someone who is in charge of dyeing cloth or clothing. Dyers also dye the
       wool for others to make their own fabrics from, but their primary role is to sell dyed
       fabric.

       Engineer: These individuals are responsible for designing and building the large
       constructions and mechanisms that are used in siege machines, drawbridges and
       portcullis. Having a good engineer on hand during a siege or a sacking of a walled city
       is never a bad thing.

       Entertainer: Skilled in song, dance or any number of talents that would classify them
       as ‘entertainers’, these professionals spend their lives trying to make the masses enjoy a
       few hours of their lives at a time.

       Farmer (agricultural): Members of one of the oldest professions, farmers that tend
       their fields and gardens yield a massive amount of food that is seen in city markets and
       village grocers.

       Farmer (livestock): The opposite side of the farming coin, livestock farmers raise fowl,
       sheep, pigs or cattle for the purposes of their resource materials. Milk, cheese, wool and
       meat can all contribute toward a livestock farmer’s income, and any Adventurer that
       could sponsor or hire one can expect to never be without these items.

       Fisherman: Hunters of the rivers, lakes and seas, fishermen pull their living by hook,
       net or spear out of the water. Fishermen tend to live near their favourite fishing areas
       and some may even have boats or ships to get the best catches they can.


 128
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                        2
         Fletcher: These caretaking individuals are responsible for ‘fletching:’ plucking,
         cutting, waxing and applying the feathers to arrows and crossbow bolts. Without their
         handiwork, archers’ and hunters’ bows would have less than half of their accuracy,
         especially over longer distances. Fletchers are often very close to local carpenters and
         blacksmiths.

         Furrier: Only slightly different from a common tanner, furriers can take a piece
         of mink, beaver or similar hide and clean it so that the fur is not harmed and stays
         intact. Soft furs are a must in many industries, especially in winter climates where
         their warmth is an asset. Also, armourers tend to want furs to line their stiff or harder
         armour segments.

         Gemcutter: Members of a rare but useful profession, gemcutters turn raw stones into
         jewellery-grade gems. This increases the value of the gems tremendously depending on
         the skill of the cutter, which is why so many Adventurers who find raw gems quickly
         seek one out. A few hours of chiselling and chipping and a single chunk of raw stone
         can be turned into several smaller ones – each worth more than the original.

         Guard: These comprise one of the most common soldier types to be seen in any
         culture. Guards are simple swordsmen that are paid to stand watch over a particular
         place or thing, raising an alarm if need be. They are not a frequent asset for starting
         Adventurers but those who have earned holdings or small fortunes might want to have
         extra sets of eyes while they are away.

         Guide: No matter where an Adventurer goes, he will likely need someone to help him
         find his way at some point. Some might believe that they are better off finding their
         own paths but a good and knowledgeable guide can save time, and lives.

         Healer: When disease, illness and infection are wracking a body, a healer is called for
         or sought out. Healers use a mixture of alchemy and faith to strengthen the body’s
         defences and help fight the bad elements within it.

         Herald: Adventurers rarely wish to be introduced boldly or loudly unless they are
         trying to make an entrance (or lying about their true natures) but a hired herald is the
         perfect way to do so.

         Hunter: Whether they are hunting dangerous predators to protect a village or venturing
         out to come back with drags full of deer and elk, the idea is the same – hunters brave
         the wilderness to track, hunt and kill animals.

         Interpreter: With a multitude of races, species and cultures that exist there are a great
         many barriers that must be overcome every day by travelling Adventurers. A single
         mishap or miscommunication could result in violence or missed opportunities. The
         best way around this is to quickly hire a learned interpreter, who will happily let both
         sides of the conversation know what is being said by the other.



                                                                                                     129
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                               2
       Jester: This is a specialised form of entertainer who is talented at social humour as well
       as physical gags. Through the use of puns, metaphor and comedic anecdotes a jester
       can give the highest of nobility a satirical ribbing that is risqué and ultimately easier to
       swallow than the scandalous behaviour it is based on.

       Jeweller: These are the skilled artisans and craftsmen that take small amounts of
       precious metals and other materials and turn them into elegant pieces of jewellery.

       Labourer: Nothing more than hired muscle used to lift and carry, labourers are found
       anywhere there is physical work to be had. They are cheap and replaceable – perfect for
       some Adventurer’s needs.

       Leatherworker: Leatherworkers are masters of taking simple hides that have been
       treated by a tanner and turning them into an assortment of useful goods. Responsible
       for the creation of leather armour segments before they go off to the armourer to
       be riveted together, a leatherworker can be a much cheaper option for fixing leather
       armour.

       Locksmith: Masters of tumblers and slides, locksmiths are useful for both setting up
       and getting past the mechanical safeguards on doors, chests and gates. Having a skilled
       locksmith at an Adventurer’s disposal can be a huge boon when trying to get into
       barred places or when keeping others from learning secrets.

       Maid: Maids are professional cleaners who are expected to go about a home or estate
       and make sure that the items and valuables are presentable for company. This is, of
       course, a position of great trust – and commonly worries for the employer. Maids are
       very useful to be hired by outside influences to conveniently leave open windows or
       doors for later use.

       Man at Arms: Professional soldiers trained for nothing but combat, men at arms
       are rarely hired in groups smaller than 20 and are used for some of the most direct
       confrontations. Skilled with swords and spears, a unit of men at arms is a fearful sight
       to see marching in formation toward an enemy and can be well worth an Adventurer’s
       coin to uproot a dug-in enemy.

       Metalsmith: This is a group of professionals with several different names and titles
       depending on what sort of metal they are in charge of smelting and forging. Goldsmiths,
       coppersmiths and silversmiths work in their unsurprising fields and braziers work in
       brass. Depending on what manner of work is needed of them, any of these metalsmiths
       can plate, coat or forge items for their employers.

       Midwife: This is a type of nursemaid or in-home caretaker that often specialises in the
       birthing of children. Midwives are good at not only keeping the mother-to-be and the
       infant healthy but also are schooled in how to help around the home for the first few
       days while the new mother recuperates.



 130
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                          2
         Miller: In charge of creating mash and flour at grain mills, millers must be skilled not
         only at the loading and unloading of the millstone but also of the bagging, storage and
         selling of the resulting products. Hiring a miller also normally means having access to
         the mill itself, which is quite possibly why an Adventurer would want to go out of his
         way to hire one.

         Navigator: A guide on a larger scale, navigators are good at picking directions and
         steering travel using the sun, moon and stars. Whether trying to find a way out of
         thick wilderness without a map or bringing a ship to port in the endless blue of a night
         time sea, hiring a navigator is money well spent should the alternative be getting lost
         forever.

         Nurse: Whether the nurse is a doctor in training or happy being an assistant, he is a
         useful aid in all medical matters. Like an extra pair of hands for a doctor or surgeon,
         nurses are well-versed in the healing arts.

         Painter, artiste: These are masters of portraits, mosaics and other beautiful imagery
         made with dyes, oils and pastes.

         Painter, limner: Although their use of dyes and paint washes are no less exacting than
         that of artistes, ‘limners’ are in charge of painting large structures, signs and the like.
         They must know how to write adequately legibly, as their signs must be readable.

         Papermaker: Buying paper from a scribe can be a fool’s gamble when there is a local
         papermaker available. Pressing the pulp or reeds into sheets to be dried and pulled into
         parchment, papyrus and scroll vellum, papermakers have a trade that is rarely utilised
         by the underclass and is the crutch for many other artisans and noble roles.

         Pikeman: Soldiers trained to use longspears or halberds, pikemen are the best type of
         martial hireling to set against enemy cavalry. Most effective in dual lines that number
         eight or ten each, pikemen are generally well-armoured to absorb the impact of those
         who make it past their bristling wall of weapons.

         Porter: This is a class of labourer whose only role is to carry something from one place
         to another. Porters are often in charge of objects bigger than what a courier would take
         but not quite as large and heavy as what a labourer would be called in for.

         Potter: Crafters of vases, urns and clayware, potters are quite a popular class of artisan.
         Examples of their craft include everything from sun-dried water jugs to exquisite, finely
         enamelled burial urns. It seems that there is not a walk of life that cannot find use for
         a potter’s wares.

         Priest/Priestess: Higher in the classification of the faithful than mere acolytes, priests
         and priestesses are in charge of many more duties and roles in their order or cult.
         Buying time away from their patronages is difficult and expensive, but could be well



                                                                                                       131
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                 2
       worth the extra effort and cost. Priests and priestesses have permission from their elders
       to perform greater rituals and works in their faith, and Adventurers that are not of
       opposing faiths can benefit greatly from them.

       Prostitute: The so-called ‘oldest profession’, prostitution varies in legality and
       acceptance from culture to culture, with some viewing it as normal and necessary and
       others considering it a hanging offence.

       Sage/Soothsayer: Holders of great knowledge, sages and soothsayers dole out nuggets
       of insight for a handful of coins.

       Sailor: When someone needs to row or sail a boat across a large enough body of water
       a team of sailors is a must. They are skilled at the needs of boating, and can make
       adjustments for tide, current and weather that a common passenger would never be
       able to manage. Also, oceanic sailors tend to be well-travelled and full of stories and
       tales from all the places they have seen, which could be worth a few rounds’ worth of
       grog to an interested Adventurer.

       Scribe: This is a professional writer, who makes his living putting others’ words down
       on parchment or arranging already written works to be purchased by others.

       Sculptor: Shaping marble and stone with chisel and rasp, sculptors are commonly very
       patient artistes that are capable of creating awe inspiring and dazzling statues from
       blocks of raw stone. Their work is long and tedious, but stands against the tests of time
       when carved with skill and care. Anything permanent cast in a sculptor’s wares will last
       long beyond that which was sculpted, barring any accident or intervention.

       Seamstress: Minor repairs and quick fixes are a seamstress’ common work, setting
       needle and thread to patching holes and trimming hems in short order. Their work
       tends to be fast and efficient, leaving more drawn out jobs to tailors.

       Shepherd: A specialised form of livestock farmer, shepherds use dogs to keep huge
       flocks of sheep or goats manageable as they graze hills and fields. They must always be
       wary of predators and poachers and cannot allow members of the flock to stray too far
       away.




 132
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                        2
         Shipwright: These specialist carpenters focus their efforts on building (and repairing)
         boats, canoes, kayaks and sailing vessels.

         Surgeon: Surgeons are steady-handed professionals that know they are the last line
         between life and death, and their skilled decisions could mean saving the person in
         front of them. Adventurers, who are well-known for sustaining horrible wounds in
         their travels and questing, should always keep in mind the location of the closest
         surgeon in case of emergency.

         Tailor: Crafters of all things made of cloth or canvas, tailors are one of the building
         blocks of any society. Their wares can be found on the backs of every citizen, covering
         the beds of their homes and hanging from the masts of ships.

         Tanner: These skilled workers take freshly cut hides and turn them into the leather and
         suede that is then forwarded on to leatherworkers and tailors to be made into various
         products.

         Undertaker: A morbidly useful career, undertakers put the dead to final rest. They are
         in charge of coffin-ordering, cremations and burials for the recently deceased. In large
         enough communities the dead could stack up quickly without their efforts, making for
         foul environmental conditions riddled with stench and disease.

         Vintner: This is the high-class version of a brewer skilled in the ways of wine and wine-
         making. It is a business that often comes with wealth and prestige and the best wineries
         are known not by their goods but by the names of their owners.

         Weaponsmith: This is a specialised form of blacksmith who creates the weapons
         wielded by Adventurers. They are also the best people to go to for weapon repairs and
         modifications.

         Yeoman: This type of ‘landed’ soldier is a specialist with a longbow. Typically hired
         in groups of a dozen or more, a yeoman unit volleying their shots into the enemy
         from hundreds of paces away can destroy a unit’s morale, even if it does not kill them
         physically.




                                                                                                     133
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                               2
                        134
                               Hirelings and Cohorts
                                                                                                                          Secondary
                               Profession              Primary Skill          Primary Aptitude   Secondary Skill          Aptitude    Cost per Day/Use (wage)
                               Accountant              Lore (Appraisal)       60%                Evaluate                 40%         1 SP
                               Acolyte                 Lore (Religion)        70%                Culture (Own)            50%         5 CP1
                               Advisor                 Influence              65%                Insight                  50%         1 SP




Alex Greene (order #3215550)
                               Alchemist               Lore (Alchemy)         75%                Mechanisms               35%         5 SP1
                               Animal Trainer          Lore (Animal)          60%                Ride                     50%         1 SP
                               Apothecary              Healing                45%                Lore (Alchemy)           30%         6 CP
                               Armourer                Craft (Armourer)       65%                Craft (Metalsmith)       40%         2 SP1
                               Barber                  Craft (Grooming)       70%                First Aid                30%         3 CP
                               Barkeep                 Craft (Libations)      65%                Influence                40%         4 CP
                               Blacksmith              Craft (Blacksmith)     70%                Craft (Metalsmith)       35%         1 SP1
                               Bowman                  Bow or Crossbow        50%                Craft (Bowyer)           35%         8 CP
                               Bowyer                  Craft (Bowyer)         60%                Craft (Fletcher)         30%         5 CP1
                               Brewer                  Craft (Brewer)         70%                Craft (Cooper)           25%         3 CP1
                               Burglar                 Stealth                60%                Athletics                45%         100 SP
                               Butcher                 Craft (Butcher)        70%                Craft (Cooking)          45%         2 CP1
                               Butler/Page             Craft (Husbandry)      60%                Influence                55%         5 CP
                               Carpenter               Craft (Carpenter)      65%                Engineering              35%         2 CP1
                               Cartographer            Craft (Cartography)    70%                Lore (Roads and Paths)   40%         3 SP1
                               Cavalryman              Spear or Flail         60%                Ride                     55%         1 SP
                               Chandler                Craft (Candlemaking)   75%                Craft (Waxen)            50%         2 CP1
                               Chef                    Craft (Cooking)        70%                Lore (Cuisine)           55%         4 SP1




2
                                                                                                                           Secondary
                               Profession              Primary Skill             Primary Aptitude Secondary Skill          Aptitude    Cost per Day/Use (wage)
                               Clerk                   Influence                 50%              Evaluate                 40%         3 CP
                               Cobbler                 Craft (Cobbler)           65%              Craft (Leatherworking)   30%         4 CP1
                               Coinsmith               Craft (Minting)           70%              Craft (Metalsmith)       35%         7 CP1
                               Cook                    Craft (Cooking)           50%              Lore (Cuisine)           25%         4 CP1




Alex Greene (order #3215550)
                               Cooper                  Craft (Barrel-making)     65%              Craft (Carpentry)        40%         3 CP
                               Courier                 Ride or Drive             40%              Streetwise               35%         1 SP
                               Courtier                Influence                 70%              Insight or Seduction     40%         50 SP
                               Delegate                Influence                 60%              Lore (Politics)          50%         60 SP
                               Doctor                  First Aid                 75%              Healing                  50%         10 SP
                               Driver                  Drive                     60%              Lore (Equine)            45%         4 CP
                               Dyer                    Craft (Dyeing)            70%              Craft (Tailor)           30%         2 CP1
                               Engineer                Engineering               65%              Mechanisms               30%         1 SP1
                               Entertainer             Acrobatics, Dance, Play   65%              Influence                45%         1 SP
                                                       Instrument or Sing
                               Farmer (agricultural)   Craft (Farming)           50%              Lore (Regional)          40%         1 CP
                               Farmer (livestock)      Lore (Animal – varies)    50%              Lore (Regional)          40%         1 CP
                               Fisherman               Craft (Fishing)           65%              Lore (Regional)          35%         5 CP
                               Fletcher                Craft (Fletcher)          65%              Craft (Bowyer)           30%         4 CP1
                               Furrier                 Tracking                  70%              Craft (Tanner)           40%         7 CP1
                               Gemcutter               Craft (Gemcutting)        70%              Craft (Jeweller)         35%         2 SP1
                               Guard                   Sword and Shield, Spear   50%              Perception               35%         5 CP
                                                       and Shield or Polearm
                               Guide                   Lore (Regional)           60%              Culture (any) or         40%         6 CP
                                                                                                  Survival




                        135
2
                        136
                                                                                                                         Secondary
                               Profession         Primary Skill             Primary Aptitude   Secondary Skill           Aptitude    Cost per Day/Use (wage)
                               Healer             Healing                   50%                Lore (Alchemy)            30%         8 SP
                               Herald             Lore (Heraldry)           75%                Influence                 50%         2 SP
                               Hunter             Survival                  65%                Track                     50%         1 SP1
                               Interpreter        Language                  60%                Evaluate                  40%         1 SP
                               Jester             Influence                 75%                Acrobatics, Dance, Play   50%         2 SP




Alex Greene (order #3215550)
                                                                                               Instrument or Sing
                               Jeweller           Craft (Jeweller)          70%                Craft (Metalsmith)        40%         1 SP1
                               Labourer           Athletics                 65%                Streetwise                50%         1 CP
                               Leatherworker      Craft (Leatherworking)    65%                Craft (Tanner)            30%         3 CP1
                               Locksmith          Mechanisms                60%                Craft (Metalsmith)        35%         3 SP1
                               Maid               Craft (Cleaning)          50%                Craft (Sewing)            40%         4 CP
                               Man at Arms        Sword and Shield, Spear   55%                Survival                  40%         1 SP
                                                  and Shield or Polearm
                               Metalsmith         Craft (Metalsmith)        65%                Evaluate                  45%         8 CP1
                               Midwife            Craft (Midwifery)         40%                First Aid                 35%         3 CP
                               Miller             Craft (Milling)           70%                Mechanisms                30%         3 CP1
                               Navigator          Lore (Regional)           60%                Survival                  50%         7 CP
                               Nurse              First Aid                 40%                Healing                   20%         2 SP
                               Painter, artiste   Craft (Painting)          65%                Evaluate                  50%         10 SP1
                               Painter, limner    Craft (Painting)          40%                Craft (Dyeing)            20%         2 CP
                               Papermaker         Craft (Papermaking)       60%                Craft (Quill Cutting)     45%         1 SP1
                               Pikeman            Spear or Polearm          50%                Sword and Shield          40%         1 SP
                               Porter             Athletics                 40%                Streetwise                25%         3 CP




2
                                                                                                                                 Secondary
                               Profession               Primary Skill               Primary Aptitude Secondary Skill             Aptitude             Cost per Day/Use (wage)
                               Potter                   Craft (Pottery)             65%                 Craft (Painting)         40%                  5 CP1
                               Priest/Priestess         Lore (Religion)             80%                 Insight or Influence     60%                  10 SP1
                               Prostitute               Seduction                   65%                 Influence                50%                  25 SP
                               Sage/Soothsayer          Lore (Regional)             75%                 Insight                  50%                  10 SP




Alex Greene (order #3215550)
                               Sailor                   Boating or Shiphandling     65%                 Lore (Oceans and Seas)   50%                  2 CP
                               Scribe                   Craft (Calligraphy)         70%                 Craft (Quill Cutting)    35%                  2 SP1
                               Sculptor                 Craft (Sculpting)           65%                 Craft (Pottery)          40%                  6 CP1
                               Seamstress               Craft (Sewing)              50%                 Craft (Tailoring)        35%                  2 CP1
                               Shepherd                 Lore (Goat/Sheep)           75%                 Lore (Canine)            50%                  1 CP
                               Shipwright               Craft (Shipbuilding)        50%                 Boating                  35%                  3 CP1
                               Surgeon                  Healing                     75%                 First Aid                60%                  25 SP
                               Tailor                   Craft (Tailoring)           65%                 Craft (Sewing)           45%                  6 CP1
                               Tanner                   Craft (Tanning)             70%                 Craft (Leatherworking)   50%                  6 CP1
                               Undertaker               Craft (Mortuary Arts)       55%                 First Aid                35%                  4 CP
                               Vintner                  Craft (Winemaking)          70%                 Lore (Wine)              55%                  2 SP1
                               Weaponsmith              Craft (Weaponsmith)         65%                 Craft (Metalsmith)       40%                  1 SP1
                               Yeoman                   Bow                         65%                 Craft (Bowyer)           40%                  2 SP

                               1
                                This price is strictly for labour and time. Should the Adventurer purchase something, there may be an additional charge according to the item
                               purchased.




                        137
2
                           ENCHANTMENTS
       An enchantment is a permanent magical effect. As a permanent effect, it cannot be
       easily dispelled, dismissed or neutralised. The creation of enchantments is reserved
       for Sorcery. Common Magic practitioners cannot create enchantments – although
       Common Magic spells can be used to create them.

       Creating enchantments differs between the magical paths with each approach reflecting
       the nature of the magic itself.


       Sorcery Enchantments
       The power of sorcery lies in its flexibility, and it is sorcery that is capable of creating
       powerful enchanted items that need not be quested for or are temporary in nature. A
       sorcerer with the requisite Grimoire (one that contains the Enchantment Ritual sorcery
       spell) can take a mundane item – any mundane item – and created an enchanted one.

       Naturally, such a potentially powerful effect does not come without a price. While
       casting spells may only cost Magic Points, creating an enchanted item costs a sorcerer
       permanent Magic Points. The exact cost depends upon what sort of enchantment is
       being created – the more powerful the final enchantment will be, the higher the cost
       in Magic Points.

       Magic Points that are invested in an enchantment are put beyond use and are not
       regained in the usual manner. If an enchantment is broken or dismantled by the
       sorcerer who created it, his invested Magic Points are released back to him. If the
       enchanted item is broken or destroyed by someone else, they are gone forever. Sorcerers
       who have enchanted something are therefore highly protective of their enchantments
       for precisely this reason.

       Almost anything can be enchanted, from a scrap of paper, to a sword, to a ring, to the
       Hit Location of a creature. The sorcerer must be able to inscribe the proper sigils and
       formulae for the enchantment, however, so creatures without physical substance, such
       as spirits, are impossible to enchant.

       Just as any item can be enchanted, so too can any place. Sorcerers use enchantments
       to protect their colleges, towers, lairs and grimoires from the depredations of enemies
       and thieves.

       Although an enchantment cannot be dispelled, dismissed or neutralised, it is hardly
       invulnerable. An enchantment is only as strong as the object it is placed on. If that
       object is broken, torn or destroyed, so too is the enchantment.
 138
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                         2
         Unless the enchantment has specific limitations to the contrary, anyone can use an
         enchanted item.

         Sorcerers creating enchantments can use Magic Points from a number of sources, as
         follows:

         •	   Their own Magic Points
         •	   Magic Points taken from others via the Tap spell
         •	   Magic Points stored in a Magic Point crystal

         A sorcerer who relies on his own Magic Points cannot use those points until her
         dissolves the enchantment, releasing them back to his own psyche. Magic Points taken
         from another source – a crystal or Tapped subject – are lost to the sorcerer when the
         enchantment is destroyed regardless of who does the destroying. Only personal Magic
         Points can be recaptured.

         Enchanting Ritual (Sorcery Spell)
         Autonomous, Resist (Persistence)

         The casting time for the spell depends on the amount of Magic Points being used in
         the ritual, as shown on the Enchantment Times table on page 142.

         Creating any enchantment requires this spell. It must be successfully cast as part of the
         whole process of enchanting an item, which involves inscribing the sigils and formulae
         in place and acts as a focus for conferring magical power.

         If the Enchanting Ritual is being made on an unwilling, live, subject, the victim can
         resist using Persistence in the normal way (Legend Core Rulebook, page 53). If the
         Resistance is successful, then the Enchantment Ritual fails and the sorcerer cannot
         attempt to enchant that person or creature again; it remains resistant to that sorcerer’s
         attempts (other sorcerers, however, may make their own attempts).


         Enchanting Process
         The following describes in general the steps required to enchant an object, place or
         person.


         1. Preparation
         The sorcerer must spend time in preparing the item to be enchanted: cleaning,
         concentration, inscribing sigils and other formulae. In general, it takes 1 hour to
         prepare items of less than SIZ 1 and 1 hour for each subsequent point of SIZ. If the
         item is a specific Hit Location, then calculate the SIZ, and hence time, by dividing the
         creature’s SIZ Characteristic by the total number of Hit Locations it has, and rounding
         up. Thus, to enchant the arm of an average human (SIZ 11) the limb is considered
         to have SIZ 2 (11/7 – the number of Hit Locations for a human – and rounded up).
         Enchanting the limb of a giant – average SIZ 50 – would take 7 hours.

                                                                                                     139
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                               2
       2. Declaration
       When a sorcerer wishes to create an enchantment, he must inform the Games Master as
       to the spells he intends to use, the item to be enchanted, any limitations or conditions
       he wishes to place on the item and, of course, the total amount of Magic Points he will
       expend in the process. The precise Magic Point cost varies according to the specifics
       of the item.

       The number of limitations or conditions the sorcerer can impose depends on his
       Manipulation skill. He can impose one limitation or condition for every 10 points
       (rounded-up) of Manipulation. Limitations are discussed later, but a limitation does
       not cost any Magic Points to confer.


       3. Procedure
       The sorcerer must then spend a number of hours in casting the Enchanting Ritual
       spell. This duration is equal to the Magic Points invested in the enchantment, squared.
       This is summarised in the Enchantment Times table.

       At the end of this time, the sorcerer makes a Sorcery (Grimoire) test. The roll is
       modified by the type of enchantment being attempted and whether any conditions or
       limitations are placed upon the enchantment.

       If the roll succeeds, the necessary Magic Points are expended and the enchanted item is
       created. If the roll fails, the Magic Points are retained but the enchantment fails.

       A critical success when Enchanting allows an Adventurer to spend one fewer Magic
       Points to create the final effect (to a minimum of one Magic Point).

       A fumble results in the enchantment failing and one Magic Point is expended
       regardless.

       Enchantment Times
       Enchantment’s Total Magic Points         Hours To Enchant
       1                                        1
       2                                        4
       3                                        9
       4                                        16
       5                                        25
       6                                        36
       7                                        49
       8                                        64
       9                                        81
       10                                       100




 140
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                      2
         Enchantment Attributes
         Sorcerers can enchant items in several ways.

         Common Magic Enchantments
         Common Magic spells can be enchanted into an object:

         It costs 1 Magic Point for 2 Magnitude of the Common Magic Spell. The sorcerer
         must either know the spell, or have someone on-hand who does who forms part of the
         Enchanting Ritual

         The Common Magic spell is permanently bound into the enchantment. The spell works
         as per the Common Magic spell description and with the same limitations, but the person
         using it does not need to make a Common Magic skill use to activate the spell and neither
         does he expend Magic Points doing so; he merely needs to state that he is using it – or the
         magic works automatically.

         The spell must usually be appropriate to the item. However, spells can be enchanted
         into items that are worn, such as rings, talismans, charms and so on, that will confer
         the magic when the wearer is using the appropriate conduit for the magic. Thus, a ring
         with Bladesharp 3 is entirely possible, conferring the magical bonuses whenever the
         wearer picks-up a weapon that can benefit from a Bladesharp spell.

         When a Common Magic Spell from a sorcerously enchanted item is used, it cannot
         automatically be used again; a certain period of time must elapse whilst the matrix
         holding the magic in the item have a chance to rejuvenate. This ‘refresh’ time depends
         on the nature of the user, as follows:

         Sorcerer creating the enchantment	           Minutes equal to the spell’s duration
         A Named User of the Enchantment              Minutes equal to the spell’s duration x2
         Another Sorcerer	                            Minutes equal to the spell’s duration x3
         Everyone Else                                Minutes equal to the spell’s duration x4

         Named Users of an enchantment forms part of the enchantment’s conditions.

         Sorcery Spell Enchantments
         A sorcerer gains few benefits from creating an enchantment holding Sorcery spells he
         already knows as part of his Grimoire. However, as a way of conferring Sorcery spells
         on others, enchantments are an effective way of doing so.

         It costs 6 Magic Points to work a Sorcery spell into an enchantment. The spell must
         be part of a Grimoire the sorcerer already knows. However the sorcerer must also
         stipulate what Manipulations influence the Sorcery spell he is investing into the item:
         Magnitude, Range, Duration in minutes, or Targets. Combine is not compatible with
         the Enchanting Ritual spell.



                                                                                                       141
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                 2
       The maximum number of Manipulations is dependent on the sorcerer’s Manipulation
       skill in the same way the skill is used to influence the normal casting of Sorcery spells
       and each Manipulation forms a Condition. Thus, a sorcerer with Manipulation 70%
       can work seven Manipulations into a spell within an enchantment; a Magnitude 7
       spell, or a Magnitude 3 spell with a Range of 50m x the sorcerer’s POW, or a spell with
       a Duration of 4 x POW in minutes that affects up to 5 Targets. But each Manipulation
       reduces the capacity for other Conditions.

       When a Sorcery spell from an enchanted item is used, it cannot automatically be used again;
       a certain period of time must elapse whilst the matrix holding the magic in the item has a
       chance to rejuvenate. This ‘refresh’ time depends on the nature of the user, as follows:

       Sorcerer creating the enchantment		               1 Hour
       A Named User of the Enchantment		                 1D2 Hours
       Another Sorcerer				                              1D4 Hours
       Everyone Else				                                 1D6 Hours

       Named Users of an enchantment forms part of the enchantment’s conditions.

       Armouring Enchantment
       A common enchantment magically increases the armour points of an object. Each
       Magic Point invested in the Armouring Enchantment bestows one AP upon the
       enchanted object. If it is used on a living creature, it will increase armour points in only
       one Hit Location – multiple enchantments must be used to cover the entire creature.
       Likewise, if placed on a suit of armour, each Armouring Enchantment will protect only
       one Hit Location.

       Armour Points created through this enchantment count as magical armour, meaning
       that any spells that would normally ignore or negate regular and/or natural armour do
       not negate or ignore APs granted by the Armouring Enchantment.

       Binding
       This enchantment is intended to confine an otherworldly spirit, such as a ghost, demon
       or elemental. A Binding enchantment requires one Magic Point for every Characteristic
       the creature possesses. Thus, a Binding enchantment intended to contain a ghost
       requires three Magic Points to create (as a ghost only possesses INT, CHA and POW).
       A Binding enchantment may only hold one creature at a time and the creature may
       attempt to Resist the enchantment with its Spectral Combat skill in an Opposed Roll
       against the sorcerer’s Grimoire skill.

       Capturing a creature in a Binding enchantment requires either dissipating the creature
       or somehow convincing it to inhabit the item voluntarily. Capturing a dissipating spirit
       requires the Holdfast spell to be successfully cast. The sorcerer can use Holdfast to hold
       3 Magic Points per 10% of his Sorcery (Grimoire) skill, preventing the spirit from
       dissipating. However the spirit can still make attacks against the sorcerer unless he also
       uses Spirit Resistance to protect himself from spectral harm.

 142
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                          2
         Once within the Binding, the creature remains there until it is freed, either through
         the will of the item’s owner or the destruction of the Binding. A creature bound into
         an item has no natural contact with the outside world and cannot perceive it in any
         way unless it uses magic. Someone in physical contact with the binding can use it to
         engage in mental communication with the creature (provided there are no limitations
         to the contrary).

         The owner of the Binding item has complete control over the creature bound within
         and may access the creature’s knowledge, skills, Magic Points and known spells freely.
         Many creatures are of little use while inside a Binding enchantment and must therefore
         be freed if the binding’s owner wishes to use their abilities in combat or other situations.
         A bound creature can be freed and commanded to perform one hour’s worth of activity
         for the creature that freed it, after which it is truly free.

         Note that most spirits utterly resent being captured by Sorcery in this way. Any spirit
         that has not voluntarily entered into the Binding enchantment will, when freed, attack
         the sorcerer who bound it there (and, if he is not present, seek-him out for future
         revenge). How long, and how persistently, the spirit engages in this revenge depends on
         the spirit’s strength, its nature and what services it has been subjected to whilst bound.

         Warding Enchantment
         One of the most demanding enchantments to complete, yet also one of the most in
         demand. When the enchantment is complete, the Warded item generates an invisible,
         magical barrier, detectable only by magic, that protects those within from specified
         attacks or events that occur outside the Warded area.

         The items need not be visible to be effective – they may easily be concealed within a
         stone wall, for example.

         Every Warding has a series of bans set by its creator during the process of enchantment.
         For every Magic Point invested into the enchantment, the Warding can include one
         ban (and all Wardings must have at least one ban). Bans include, but are not restricted
         to: Banning those of (or not of ) a certain faith or race, specific people, spells, those not
         holding a particular flower/weapon/symbol, virgins, incorporeal creatures, those who
         do not speak a designated password upon approach, specific weapons.

         Anyone within a radius equal to the invested Magic Points of the enchanted item
         is considered to be within its Warded area. Against any banned effect or attack
         originating from outside the Warded area, the protected creatures benefit from the
         following effects:




                                                                                                         143
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                   2
       •	   A Countermagic Shield of a Magnitude equal to the Warding’s invested Magic
            Points.
       •	   An effect similar to the Consecrate spell of a Magnitude equal to the Warding’s
            invested Magic Points, which will alert those inside if anything banned by the
            Warding’s creator enters or attempts to enter the Warded area.
       •	   An effect similar to the Damage Resistance spell of a Magnitude equal to the
            Warding’s invested Magic Points, where any incoming attack dealing damage
            equal to or less than the Warding’s invested Magic Points is ignored.

       This is not the greatest versatility of a Warded item, however. Two or more Wardings that
       share the same bans (they do not necessarily need to be of equal Magic Points or even
       created by the same enchanter) will automatically conjoin when brought within each
       other’s radii and protect a far greater area than they could manage individually. When
       doing so, add together all the invested Magic Points of the linked Wardings to determine
       their Average Magic Points.

       •	   Two Warded items conjoin to form a Warding Wall. This stretches from one item
            to the other and reaches Average Magic Points in metres in height and will stay
            in effect as long as the Warded items remain within 5 + Average Magic Points in
            metres from one another.
       •	   Three Warded items conjoin to form either a hinged Warding Wall or a Warding
            Triangle, with walls as high as a Warding Wall’s. It will stay in effect for as long as
            every Warded item remains within 10 + Average Magic Points in metres from one
            other Warded item.
       •	   Four Warded items conjoin to form either a hinged Warding Wall or a Warding
            Box (more commonly called a True Warding), with walls as high as a Warding
            Wall’s. True Wardings, unlike Triangles and Walls, also cover the ‘ceiling’ of the
            Warded area and the underneath (normally to a depth of one metre). It will stay in
            effect for as long as every Warded item remains within 15 + Average Magic Points
            in metres from one other Warded item.
       •	   Each additional Warded item increases the maximum distance that the items can
            be placed apart by a further five metres.


       Conditions
       Every Sorcery enchantment can be modified by attaching conditions and limitations
       during the enchanting process. Once placed on an item, conditions may never be
       removed, expanded or added to.

       The maximum number of conditions that can be placed on an enchantment is equal to
       the sorcerer’s Manipulation divided by 10 and rounded up. Manipulations to Sorcery
       spells count as conditions, as described earlier.




 144
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                          2
         Environmental Condition
         Each Environmental Condition defines exactly where the enchantment in an item will
         be effective.

         For example: ‘Only in France confines the power of the enchantment to within the boundaries
         of the land of France; the enchantment will not work beyond. Or; ‘Only underground’
         means that the enchantment works beneath the surface of the earth, but not above it.

         Environmental conditions must be specific but can be as esoteric as the sorcerer
         wishes: ‘Work only on Wednesdays’ means precisely that.

         Target Condition
         Each Target Condition defines exactly who will or will not be affected by the enchantments
         in an item. For example, ‘Trolls only’ means that spells in an enchantment work only
         against trolls; other creatures will not be affected.

         User Condition
         If an enchantment has no User Condition assigned to it, anyone can use it. Each User
         Condition defines exactly who can or cannot use the enchantments in an item. For
         example: ‘Only by me’ means that only the sorcerer creating the enchantment can
         make use of it. ‘Only Alaric’ means that only Alaric can make use of the enchantment.
         The user concerned must be present at the Enchanting Ritual although he does not
         need to take part in it.

         Skill Condition
         This condition prevents an enchanted item from being used unless the user has a
         specific skill and a specific percentage within it. For example, ‘Athletics 60%’ means
         that, although Athletics is a Common Skill, only those with 60% or higher can make
         use of it. Basing the condition on an Advanced Skill reinforces it still further. The skill
         condition can also be applied to magical skills, too.


         Power Crystals
         Power crystals can be readily applied to any fantasy setting that may have naturally
         occurring stores of magical energy. Crystals need not be the medium; rocks, liquids,
         talismans, relics and so forth can all be used.




                                                                                                       145
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                 2
       Types of Crystal
       Crystals tend to be found in one of four types: Magic Point Store (Empty), Magic Point
       Store (Charged) and Spell Matrix.

       Random Crystal Type
       1D100            Power Crystal Type
       01–10            Magic Point Store (Charged)
       11–55            Magic Point Store (Empty)
       55–80            Spell Matrix
       81–00            Dud crystal (resembles a power crystal and
                        may even be detected as one, but is a dud)

       Magic Point Store (Empty)
       The crystal has no Magic Points stored in it but is ready, once attuned, to accept Magic
       Points and store them for further use. The larger the crystal, the more Magic Points it
       can store.

       The crystals Adventurers are most likely to find (although they are, again, rarities), can
       hold 3D6+2 Magic Points. The storage capacity generally indicates the relative size of
       the crystal. A crystal capable of storing 5 Magic Points is the size of a thumbnail; every
       5 points doubles this size.

       Magic Point Store (Charged)
       Precisely as above but the crystal already holds some Magic Points – either residual
       energy from the god who lost the blood, or Magic Points charged into the crystal by
       someone else before the crystal was lost or discarded (a very rare occurrence!). Like an
       empty crystal, a Charged crystal can store up to 3D6+2 Magic Points but comes ready
       charged with 2D6 Magic Points.

       Spell Matrix
       Instead of holding Magic Points, the crystal acts as a matrix for a Common Magic spell,
       determined randomly or chosen by the Games Master. Common Magic is still used to
       activate the spell, but it means that the user does not need to invest time and energy
       in learning the spell and the spell’s Magnitude may be of a higher Magnitude than the
       Adventurer could ordinarily learn and cast owing to INT limits.

       To randomly determine what Common Magic spell a crystal contains, roll on the
       Random Spell Matrix table on page 151. To determine its Magnitude, roll on the
       Random Magnitude table below. Magnitude only needs be determined for spells with
       the progressive trait (marked in italics in the Random Spell Matrix table).




 146
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                        2
         Whoever uses a Spell Matrix crystal must still spend Magic Points to activate the spell it
         contains. Also, only a Detect Magic or other divination can confirm what spell matrix
         the crystal holds – unless the crystal is actively used. If using a Detect Magic spell to
         identify a spell matrix and a critical Common Magic success occurs, then the nature of
         the spell matrix and its Magnitude are revealed.

         Random Magnitude table
         1D100                      Magnitude
         01                         1D6+6
         02–05                      1D6+5
         06–15                      1D6+4
         16–25                      1D6+3
         26–55                      1D6+2
         56–00                      1D6+1

         Attuning and Using a Power Crystal
         Before the Magic Points or spell can be used the crystal must be attuned; that is, the
         user establishes the right psychic/magical bond with the crystal to utilise its power.

         To do this requires two rolls. The first is either a Difficult (–20%) Insight or a Routine
         Meditation Test, which puts the user into the right mental frame. If this skill roll is
         successful, then the next stage of attuning can take place. If the roll is a critical success
         the user gains a +10% bonus to the next roll. If he fails or fumbles, attuning can go
         no further.

         The second roll is a Difficult (–20%) Persistence roll as the user attempts to create an
         irrevocable harness to the crystal’s power. If successful, he can then use the crystal’s properties
         – be that draw Magic Points, charge the crystal with them, use the spell it contains or access
         the myth. If the Persistence roll fails, he cannot attempt to attune the crystal again; if he
         fumbles, the residual power of the crystal causes psychic backlash and he suffers a loss of 1
         Magic Point permanently.

         A Magic Point Store crystal can be charged with Magic Points by the attuned user, up
         to its maximum capacity. To do this he spends one hour in concentration, holding the
         crystal, transferring the points. Stored points remain until used; the user regains the
         Magic Points he has stored in the crystal at the normal rate.

         To use the crystal he must have it on his person. He does not need to hold the crystal
         in his hand, but there needs to be a physical connection between him and the crystal.
         Thus a crystal can be worn in a ring, worked into a sword hilt, stitched into clothing
         in the form jewellery and so forth. If the two are separated – even by a few millimetres
         – then the powers of the crystal are unavailable to him until contact is re-established.




                                                                                                               147
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                         2
       Magic Points that are used in creating enchantments do not have any effect on a
       sorcerer’s own Magic Points and he does not need to tie any of his magical reserves
       into an enchantment – hence the attraction of power crystals to sorcerers. However, if
       the enchanted item is broken, releasing the Magic Points, those points dissipate to the
       aether: the sorcerer is unable to gain any benefit from them.

       The Value of Power Crystals
       Power crystals are rare and treasured artefacts: they are closely and jealously guarded and
       are very, very unlikely to find their way onto an open market. Sorcerers prize Magic Point
       Store crystals for the enormous advantage they afford in working enchantments.

       Spell Matrix crystals are the least valuable of the different types although, given the
       possibility of huge magnitude of the contained spell, they can still command vast sums
       of money.

       Power crystals are therefore not given any kind of price because, to many, they are
       priceless. However even the lowliest crystal is likely to command a starting price of
       1,000 Silver and more powerful specimens many, many times more.


       The ring is made of silver and is fashioned after a bear’s claw. It contains a Magnitude
       6 Beast Form (Bear) Common Magic Spell matrix. It has been lost to the cult of Bear
       Father for thousands of years and now the High Priest of the cult seeks its return from
       the lands inhabited by Weasel Brother. No one knows what Weasel Brother did with
       the ring after wooing the Polar Maiden, but it is rumoured he encased the ring in ice
       and hid it far beneath the ground so that the angry Bear Father would never find it
       again.




 148
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                         2
         Random Spell Matrix table
         1D100             Spell Matrix            1D100   Spell Matrix
         01–02             Abacus                  51      Fireblade
         03–04             Armoursmith’s Boon      52      Frostbite
         05–06             Babel                   53–54   Glamour
         07–08             Bandit’s Cloak          55–56   Golden Tongue
         09–10             Bearing Witness         57–58   Hand of Death
         11–12             Beast Call              59–60   Heal
         13–14             Bestial Enhancement     61–62   Ignite
         15–16             Becalm                  63–64   Light
         17                Befuddle                65–66   Lucky
         18                Bladesharp              67–68   Mason’s Boon
         19                Bludgeon                69–70   Mindspeech
         20–21             Boon of Lasting Night   71      Mobility
         22–23             Cauterise               72      Multimissile
         24–25             Chill                   73–74   Parry
         26–27             Clear Path              75–76   Pierce
         28                Co-ordination           77–78   Protection
         29–30             Countermagic            79–80   Push/Pull
         31–32             Countermagic Shield     81–82   Repair
         33–34             Darkwall                83–84   Second Sight
         35                Demoralise              85      Skybolt
         36–37             Detect X                86–87   Slow
         38                Disruption              88      Speedart
         39                Dragon’s Breath         89      Spirit Bane
         40                Dullblade               90–91   Strength
         41–42             Endurance               92      Thunder’s Voice
         43–44             Entertainer’s Smile     93–94   Understanding
         45–46             Extinguish              95–96   Vigour
         47                Fanaticism              97–98   Warmth
         48–49             Fate                    99–00   Water Breath
         50                Firearrow




                                                                             149
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                       2
                                                      ALCHEMY
       The traditional view of the alchemist is of the bearded, robed and capped scholar,
       surrounded by his apparatus, striving to turn base metals into gold. This image belies
       the truth of alchemy; for its is an ancient art practised by the Chinese, Egyptians, and
       Sumerians more than a 1,000 years before the detailed writings and experiments of
       the likes of Basil Valentine, John Dee and even Sir Isaac Newton. The transformation
       of base materials into gold is a simplistic metaphor for an art that is a subtle alliance
       of chemistry, mysticism and spirituality and which seeks, no less, for the secret of
       eternal life. The chemical experiments of alchemical practitioners have little to do with
       attaining material wealth, although it is no doubt an attractive side-effect, and more to
       do with understanding how to attain spiritual purity and consequently metaphysical
       transformation through achieving the same with the use of the Elements and the
       Metals.

       Alchemy is included here, in Arms of Legend, because the alchemical process relies on
       specific equipment and a scientific methodology far more than other forms of magic.
       Hence, the availability of equipment, which is described later in this chapter, is a
       practical necessity.


       Alchemy, Magic and Science
       Alchemy occupies a curious place in relation to both magic and science. It blends
       both, but belongs to neither. In a magic-rich world, where gods regularly grant divine
       gifts, and magical power, there are easier ways to achieve the purity and transformation
       sought by alchemists. In worlds where science dominate, alchemy’s importance is
       diminished for the simple reason that mysticism and spirituality has little place in the
       hard, logical world of empirical science, although alchemy clearly laid the foundations
       for the scientific endeavour, particularly during the European Renaissance.

       Alchemy offers something magic and science cannot. In the case of magic, alchemy
       offers permanence. Magic is a temporary application of power, short-lived and reliant
       on inherently magical paradigms such as Gods. Alchemy seeks to attain similar powers
       through defining the essence of things and then manipulating that essence to create
       something new that transcends mundane capability. In the case of science alchemy offers
       a mystical and spiritual approach that is about understanding the nature of the soul and
       its relationship with the earth and cosmos to achieve a higher state of being. Curiously,
       it is not about attaining godhood; instead alchemy is concerned with attaining human
       perfection, through purity of mind and spirit, and thereby transcending the ravages of
       disease and time to attain enlightenment.


 150
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                       2
         Lore (Alchemy) (INT x2)
         Like all Lore skills, Alchemy is based on the INT Characteristic. It is the Adventurer’s
         ability to study, perceive and understand the essential qualities and properties of the
         physical world and how they relate to the spiritual world. Alchemists study both
         practical chemistry but also metaphysics and philosophy.

         The Alchemy skill is used whenever an alchemical experiment is being conducted
         to determine the degree of success and the experiment’s result. It also measures the
         alchemist’s own progress towards purity of body, mind and spirit. The value of the
         Alchemy skill indicates what results the alchemist is capable of achieving with his degree
         of knowledge, as outlined in the Philosopher’s Stone, overleaf. However if can also be
         used in tests requiring expertise with mystical, spiritual or philosophical concepts, since
         all alchemists are widely read in both practical and metaphysical disciplines.


         Alchemists concern themselves with four core endeavours: Understanding (the physical
         and metaphysical worlds), Manipulation (of the same), Transmutation (of the physical
         into the metaphysical, and vice versa) and Purity. They do this through the study of
         the Elements and the Seven Metals. Alchemists have determined that metals can be
         subdivided into seven lesser forms which relate to the Prime Metals which are: Copper,
         Gold, Iron, Lead, Mercury, Silver and Tin. Gold is the purest metal, symbolising physical
         and spiritual purity and perfection. By transmuting the six lesser metals into gold, the
         alchemist hopes to unlock the secret of achieving similar, personal purity and perfection.




Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                           2
       The mechanism for this understanding, and the thing pursued by all alchemist
       Adventurers, is the Philosopher’s Stone. The Alchemist must also invest the
       Philosopher’s Stone with Magic Points; this determines its effects, as described. The
       Magic Point investment is actually an unconscious act for the alchemist, occurring as
       part of the metaphysical application of the Alchemy skill. As many Magic Points can be
       invested as the Alchemist desires, depending on personal reserves. However, it requires
       one gram of Philosopher’s Stone to store at least one magic point.


       The Philosopher’s Stone
       Also known as the Essence, the Quintessence, the Magisterium and the Magnum
       Opus, the Philosopher’s Stone is so-named not because it is a physical stone, but
       because it can resist the effects of fire in the same way a physical stone resists them.
       When created, the Philosopher’s Stone takes the form of a fine, fragrant, sweet-tasting
       powder that has the brilliance of the most perfect glass and may be of any colour. The
       Philosopher’s Stone is the agent used in affecting transmutation and attaining purity.
       The Philosopher’s Stone has its own degree of purity, based on the alchemist’s skill. It
       is an amalgamation of three components: mercury, ‘salt’(not sodium chloride, but a
       compound from dissolving one of the base metals in strong acid and then distilling the
       residue) and sulphur. Mercury is the primal element that makes all things malleable
       and tramsutable; sulphur provides flammability, or the catalyst for transformation; and
       salt binds the two together, bringing about the Philosopher’s Stone.


       Making the Philosopher’s Stone
       Making the Philosopher’s Stone requires one kilogram of each component to create
       one gram of Philosopher’s Stone. The alchemist requires access to a laboratory and an
       array of alchemical equipment which must include a furnace, mortars for grinding,
       alembics and a variety of other paraphernalia detailed further on in this section. It
       takes one week to prepare one gram of the Stone. An Alchemy test is then made and,
       if successful, the Philosopher’s Stone is crystallised. A critical success yields double the
       amount.

       The Alchemist must also invest the Philosopher’s Stone with Magic Points; this
       determines its purity, as described. The Magic Point investment is actually an
       unconscious act for the alchemist, occurring as part of the metaphysical application
       of the Alchemy skill. As many Magic Points can be invested as the Alchemist desires,
       depending on personal reserves. However, it requires one gram of Philosopher’s Stone
       to store one Magic Point.


       Properties of the Philosopher’s Stone
       Once crystallised the Philosopher’s Stone has properties based on its Purity. Its Purity
       is determined by the skill of the alchemist.




 152
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                          2
         Philosopher’s Stone Purity
         Alchemist’s Lore
         (Alchemy) Skill                 Purity
         Value            Purity         Property    Effect
         01–50%           1              Healing     For every Magic Point invested in
                                                     the creation of the Stone, 1 Hit
                                                     Point of damage in each location is
                                                     healed immediately. The Stone can be
                                                     sprinkled on, or rubbed into, a wound
                                                     to provide healing, or can drunk in the
                                                     form of a solution.
         51–100%               2         Disease     For every 3 Magic Points invested, the
                                         Resistance  imbiber gains +5% to their Resilience
                                                     skill for the purposes of resisting disease.
                                                     This effect is permanent, and any
                                                     existing disease is immediately cured.
         101–150%              3         Poison      For every 3 Magic Points invested, the
                                         Resistance  imbiber gains +5% to their Resilience
                                                     skill for the purposes of resisting poison.
                                                     This effect is permanent, and any
                                                     existing poison is immediately cured.
         151–250%              4         Longevity   For every 3 Magic Points invested the
                                                     imbiber gains an additional 5 years
                                                     to their normal lifespan. They are
                                                     not immortal and not immune to the
                                                     physical damage, but the ageing process
                                                     slows as their allotted span increases.
         251%+                 5         Immortality For the Philosopher’s Stone to grant
                                                     immortality, the alchemist must be able
                                                     to invest at least 250 Magic Points.
                                                     Where reserves are found and how they
                                                     are stored is a problem for the alchemist
                                                     to solve. Once imbibed, the Adventurer
                                                     is immortal with ageing arrested. The
                                                     Adventurer is still susceptible to all
                                                     forms of damage, but immune to the
                                                     passage of time.

         The Purity Property column determines what the Philosopher’s Stone, when ingested,
         can achieve. All effects are stackable, meaning that, for example, a Purity 3 Philosopher’s
         Stone would heal damage and both cure disease and poison effects as well as increasing
         the imbiber’s Resilience.




                                                                                                       153
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                 2
       Transmutation
       The Philosopher’s Stone is used as the agent to turn base metal into gold. The number
       of Magic Points invested in the Philosopher’s Stone, multiplied by its Purity, is the
       amount of grams of base metal the alchemist can turn into half that weight in gold.
       Thus an alchemist who has created 6 grams of Purity 3 Philosopher’s Stone, invested
       with 6 Magic Points, can transmute 18 grams of copper or tin, say, into 9 grams of pure
       gold. The transmutation process takes one week per gram of base metal and requires
       a successful Alchemy each week test to accomplish. Failing a test means the process
       must be repeated from scratch. The alchemist needs to be in attendance for at least
       12 hours of each day to ensure the transmutation is going according to plan, although
       apprentices and associates can take over to allow the alchemist to rest.

       Naturally enough the alchemist must have access to the raw components as well as
       a fully stocked and functioning laboratory. He cannot conduct any other alchemical
       processes or studies whilst transmuting base metal to gold; his full attention must be
       given to the task. If the Alchemy test is a critical success, then the amount of gold
       created at the end of the process is one gram higher than expected. If the Alchemy roll
       is fumbled, then roll on the Transmutation Backlash table.

       Transmutation Backlash Table
       1D20         Effect
       01–05        Equipment overheats and experiment must be aborted.
       07–10        Experiment fails with raw material rendered to a useless slag.
       11–14        Equipment overheats and explodes. All alchemical apparatus is
                    destroyed.
       15–16        Equipment overheats and explodes. All alchemical apparatus is
                    destroyed and alchemist plus any companions sustain 1D6 damage
                    from flying glass and earthenware.
       17–18        As above, but the explosion is of ferocious intensity. Alchemist plus any
                    companions sustain 2D6 damage.
       19           Conflagration. A Large Fire consumes the entire laboratory. All
                    occupants suffer 3D6 damage. All equipment destroyed.
       20           Explosion. The entire laboratory explodes with Inferno intensity. 5D6
                    damage to all occupants, plus a raging fire that damages all buildings
                    within 60 metres of the laboratory’s location.

       Poisons
       Alchemists can manufacture poisons and their antidotes. The completed poison’s
       Potency is up to, or equal to, the alchemist’s Alchemy skill, and the characteristics of
       the poison (Conditions, Onset Time and Duration) is determined by his skill rating.
       It takes one week to make one dose of poison and the alchemist requires appropriate
       materials and apparatus to formulate it. The alchemist determines what skill (Persistence
       or Resilience) is used to resist the poison’s effects.



 154
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                       2
         Alchemy Poisons Table
         Alchemy Skill     Conditions         Onset Time             Duration
         01–20             1                  Immediate              Instant
         21–40             2                  1D3 Minutes            1D3 Minutes
         41–60             3                  1D3 Hours              1D3 Hours
         61–80             4                  1D3 Days               1D3 Days
         81–100+           5                  1D3 Weeks              1D3 Weeks

         Conditions: The maximum number of Conditions (see Legend, page 79) the alchemist
         can imbue into the poison.

         Onset Time: The amount of time required before the poison takes effect, requiring a
         Resistance roll.

         Duration: The time period over which the poison affects the body. The frequency
         of Resistance tests are determined by the alchemist but must follow the Duration
         increment. For example, a poison with a Duration of 1D3 weeks requires Resistance
         rolls to be made weekly; they cannot be given a frequency of hours or days.

         An alchemist can manufacture a poison with a combination of lesser Conditions,
         Onset Time and Duration as determined by his skill. An alchemist with a skill of 60%
         could, for example, concoct a poison with two Conditions, with a 1D3 Hour Onset
         Time and a 1D3 Minute Duration. He could not, however, concoct a two Condition
         poison with a 1D3 Day Onset Time.

         Naturally enough, an alchemist can also formulate the antidote to any poison he
         has created. All antidotes can be ingested in advance to prevent against the poison’s
         effects, or be taken afterwards to treat the symptoms (assuming there is enough time).
         Antidotes always arrest the damage; they do not cure it.

         Naturally enough, an alchemist can also formulate the antidote to any poison he has
         created. All antidotes, with the exception of Class 1 poisons, can be ingested in advance
         to prevent against the poison’s effects, or be taken afterwards to treat the symptoms
         (assuming there is enough time). Antidotes always arrest the damage; they do not cure it.


         The Alchemist’s Laboratory
         Laboratories come in all shapes and sizes and may be hidden or in open view, depending
         on the secrecy of the alchemist. Common to all laboratories, though, is the range and
         variety of equipment to be found there. This section describes the essential components
         of an alchemist’s laboratory.




                                                                                                     155
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                               2
       The Laboratory
       An alchemist requires a workspace. Somewhere large enough to accommodate
       a workbench a couple of metres in length, a metre in width and sturdy enough to
       support all the alchemical apparatus required for experiments. The laboratory also
       need sufficient room for storage of raw materials and equipment spares. Thus, most
       alchemists own or rent suitable premises or rooms within such premises, where they
       will not be disturbed and the sight, sound and smell of their experiments will not
       attract undue alarm or attention.


       Heat Source
       This is essential, and it must be both contained and easy to regulate, allowing a rapid
       increase or decrease of heat promote or arrest processes such as distillation. The simplest
       heat source is an open fire, but this is difficult to regulate. Therefore it is common for
       most alchemists to invest in an athanor. This is a clay furnace about one and a half
       metres in height. It can be split into several sections and the base section contains a
       small fireplace for the heat source. Each section can be fitted with a grid or stand for
       various receptacles, and the even heat distribution around the athanor allows constant
       temperatures to be maintained.

       Most powerful furnaces, either of a beehived or ziggurat design, are used for smelting,
       rapid distillation, sublimation and digestion, according to the alchemist’s needs. Large
       furnaces are charcoal, coal or wood fired and give out huge amounts of heat and
       sometimes noxious gases. Thus they need to be in large, well ventilated areas and kept
       under strict watch whilst in operation.


       Vessels
       Alchemists use a vast array of different vessels, made from glass, clay and earthenware,
       for their experiments. Vessels come in all shapes and sizes. It is a tendency for alchemists
       to buy the largest vessels they can, even though the materials they create might be very,
       very small. The bigger and more impressive the assembly of vessels; the more impressive
       and important the laboratory appears. Space prevents a full listing, but the key vessels
       to be found in a typical laboratory are:

       Alembics
       A glass or earthenware vessel in two parts. The lower part is a bulbous flask in which
       ingredients are placed for heating. The upper part is a domed vessel that can be separated
       from the lower. It has a stem leading from its base that points downwards at an angle
       allowing for condensing fluids to drain into a collecting vessel, such as a receiver.

       Cucurbits
       A wide-necked, bulbous jar used for boiling. Several cucurbits can be stacked together,
       with the upper jars having hollow bottoms to allow vapours to pass upwards and
       condense against the sides of the vessel.



 156
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                          2
         Retorts
         Another bulbous jar with a long, swan-like neck that curves over the side of the bowl in
         a gentle bend. Used for distillation and in conjunction with matrasses and recipients.

         Matrasses
         A matrass is a spherical bowl with a long, angled, stem-like neck that rises some way
         above the bowl. Used to collect distillate, vapours and condensing liquids in conjunction
         with retorts and other vessels.

         Pelican
         Similar to an alembic but with two stems leading from the upper bowl allowing
         different distillates to be collected separately.

         Recipient
         A large bulb with a short, wide-mouthed, angled stem, and used to collect distillates
         and vapours from retorts and other vessels.

         The cost of these alchemical apparatus items is given in the Alchemical Tools table,
         below. They are generally available in Medium Cities and larger.

         Alchemical Tools
         Apparatus                      Price (SP)
         Alembics                       100
         Cucurbits                      150
         Retorts                        200
         Matrasses                      200
         Pelican                        225
         Recipient                      150

         Attempting any alchemical operation without one of the above being present imposes
         a –15% penalty on the Lore (Alchemy) skill.

         If, when conducting any experiment, the Lore (Alchemy) roll is fumbled, 1D6 pieces of
         equipment are damaged or destroyed as a result of the experiment having gone wrong.
         Roll 1D6 to determine which pieces have been damaged, re-rolling any duplicate
         results:

         Random Apparatus
         1D6                             Apparatus
         1                               Alembics
         2                               Cucurbits
         3                               Retorts
         4                               Matrasses
         5                               Pelican
         6                               Recipient
                                                                                                     157
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                               2
       Sustaining the Life of an Alchemist
       Alchemists require access to raw materials, most notably base metals and various other
       chemicals for the creation of the salts necessary to crystallise the Philosopher’s Stone
       such as sulphur. This requires money and good connections, particularly with the
       trading guilds of a city. Many alchemists thus work under the patronage of someone
       wealthy enough to finance their activities but who may have motives less pure than
       those the alchemist. This might be a wealthy noble or noble family but equally it might
       be a cult or guild and, in these circumstances, the needs of the patron tend to come
       before the higher motives of the alchemist himself.

       Whilst it is in the power of a Legend alchemist Adventurer to make gold to pay for their
       own activities, the quantities they can make are relatively small and the core resources
       considerable. It is therefore common for alchemists to spend their time labouring on
       smaller, less edifying projects for their patron and in creating small doses of potions
       and balms for others.

       Alchemists tend to be self-absorbed, studious individuals concerned less with making gold
       and magic potions and more with achieving knowledge and refining particular alchemical
       processes aimed at improving the quality of the elusive Philosopher’s Stone. They are not
       adventuring types and are more likely to hire Adventurers (as bodyguards, or agents to
       procure certain minerals) than to do the adventuring. There are also many alchemists who
       are charlatans; those who lack the true skill and dedication to perform alchemy but claim
       they have the talent in order to secure prestige and personal wealth without having to work
       for it. True alchemists are unconcerned by the lure of wealth. Creating gold from base
       metals is merely an expression of their skill. The true goal is immortality and purity, and this
       requires decades of study and experimentation to achieve.

       For all these reasons alchemists are recommended as Non-Player Characters rather than
       as Adventurers. More to the point, their alchemical abilities need to be carefully assessed
       in the overall scheme of a campaign. If alchemy is a successful enterprise then eternal life
       or longevity will be commonplace. Transmuting base metal into gold in vast quantities
       will devalue gold as a currency. Charlatans will find shortcuts that create false gold, thus
       debasing the reputation of true alchemists, and many hedge magicians and peddlers of
       cheap remedies will make the quality of true magical potions suspect.




 158
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                              2
                    Legend & Open Content
           Here at Mongoose Publishing, we want what we truly believe to be one of the best
          fantasy RPGs on the market to be easy to use and modify. We have therefore made
              this rulebook Open Content, in conjunction with the Open Game Licence.

         All the text of this book is designated as Open Content – this means you are free to
         use the Open Game Licence (overleaf ) to reproduce this text and build upon it with
         your own scenarios and mechanics. You can even print and sell such work, if that is
         your desire (and we would wish you the very best of luck if you choose to do this!).

          By using the Open Content of this book, you also have permission to download the
          Legend Compatible logo from our web site (on the Legend product pages), and use
           that on any Legend work you publish, to demonstrate your material is part of the
                                       wider Legend family.

                    Please note that the artwork in this book is not Open Content.

           All books in the core Legend range (those whose titles have the word ‘Legend’ in
          them) will also be designated as Open Content, allowing you to expand your own
         games in many different directions, while maintaining a solid root that everyone will
                                           be familiar with.

           For example, you might be using Legend to produce your own gaming world. If
         you wanted to add some high seas action, you can simply and quickly bring over the
          Open Content rules we produce in, say, Pirates of Legend, knowing that everyone
                     who plays Legend will at least be familiar with those rules.




Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                     2
  OPEN GAME LICENSE Version 1.0a
  The following text is the property of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. and is Copyright 2000 Wizards of the Coast, Inc
  (‘Wizards’). All Rights Reserved.
  1. Definitions: (a)’Contributors’ means the copyright and/or trademark owners who have contributed Open Game
  Content; (b)’Derivative Material’ means copyrighted material including derivative works and translations (including
  into other computer languages), potation, modification, correction, addition, extension, upgrade, improvement, com-
  pilation, abridgment or other form in which an existing work may be recast, transformed or adapted; (c) ‘Distribute’
  means to reproduce, license, rent, lease, sell, broadcast, publicly display, transmit or otherwise distribute; (d)’Open
  Game Content’ means the game mechanic and includes the methods, procedures, processes and routines to the extent
  such content does not embody the Product Identity and is an enhancement over the prior art and any additional
  content clearly identified as Open Game Content by the Contributor, and means any work covered by this License,
  including translations and derivative works under copyright law, but specifically excludes Product Identity. (e) ‘Product
  Identity’ means product and product line names, logos and identifying marks including trade dress; artifacts; creatures
  characters; stories, storylines, plots, thematic elements, dialogue, incidents, language, artwork, symbols, designs, depic-
  tions, likenesses, formats, poses, concepts, themes and graphic, photographic and other visual or audio representations;
  names and descriptions of characters, spells, enchantments, personalities, teams, personas, likenesses and special abili-
  ties; places, locations, environments, creatures, equipment, magical or supernatural abilities or effects, logos, symbols,
  or graphic designs; and any other trademark or registered trademark clearly identified as Product identity by the owner
  of the Product Identity, and which specifically excludes the Open Game Content; (f ) ‘Trademark’ means the logos,
  names, mark, sign, motto, designs that are used by a Contributor to identify itself or its products or the associated
  products contributed to the Open Game License by the Contributor (g) ‘Use’, ‘Used’ or ‘Using’ means to use, Distrib-
  ute, copy, edit, format, modify, translate and otherwise create Derivative Material of Open Game Content. (h) ‘You’ or
  ‘Your’ means the licensee in terms of this agreement.
  2. The License: This License applies to any Open Game Content that contains a notice indicating that the Open Game
  Content may only be Used under and in terms of this License. You must affix such a notice to any Open Game Con-
  tent that you Use. No terms may be added to or subtracted from this License except as described by the License itself.
  No other terms or conditions may be applied to any Open Game Content distributed using this License.
  3. Offer and Acceptance: By Using the Open Game Content You indicate Your acceptance of the terms of this License.
  4. Grant and Consideration: In consideration for agreeing to use this License, the Contributors grant You a perpetual,
  worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive license with the exact terms of this License to Use, the Open Game Content.
  5. Representation of Authority to Contribute: If You are contributing original material as Open Game Content, You
  represent that Your Contributions are Your original creation and/or You have sufficient rights to grant the rights con-
  veyed by this License.
  6. Notice of License Copyright: You must update the COPYRIGHT NOTICE portion of this License to include the
  exact text of the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any Open Game Content You are copying, modifying or distributing,
  and You must add the title, the copyright date, and the copyright holder’s name to the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any
  original Open Game Content you Distribute.
  7. Use of Product Identity: You agree not to Use any Product Identity, including as an indication as to compatibility, ex-
  cept as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of each element of that Product Identity.
  You agree not to indicate compatibility or co-adaptability with any Trademark or Registered Trademark in conjunction
  with a work containing Open Game Content except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with
  the owner of such Trademark or Registered Trademark. The use of any Product Identity in Open Game Content does
  not constitute a challenge to the ownership of that Product Identity. The owner of any Product Identity used in Open
  Game Content shall retain all rights, title and interest in and to that Product Identity.
  8. Identification: If you distribute Open Game Content You must clearly indicate which portions of the work that you
  are distributing are Open Game Content.
  9. Updating the License: Wizards or its designated Agents may publish updated versions of this License. You may use
  any authorised version of this License to copy, modify and distribute any Open Game Content originally distributed
  under any version of this License.
  10. Copy of this License: You MUST include a copy of this License with every copy of the Open Game Content You
  Distribute.
  11. Use of Contributor Credits: You may not market or advertise the Open Game Content using the name of any
  Contributor unless You have written permission from the Contributor to do so.
  12. Inability to Comply: If it is impossible for You to comply with any of the terms of this License with respect to some
  or all of the Open Game Content due to statute, judicial order, or governmental regulation then You may not Use any
  Open Game Material so affected.
  13. Termination: This License will terminate automatically if You fail to comply with all terms herein and fail to cure
  such breach within 30 days of becoming aware of the breach. All sublicenses shall survive the termination of this
  License.
  14. Reformation: If any provision of this License is held to be unenforceable, such provision shall be reformed only to
  the extent necessary to make it enforceable.
  15. COPYRIGHT NOTICE
  Open Game License v 1.0a Copyright 2000, Wizards of the Coast, Inc.
  Legend Core Rulebook, Copyright 2011, Mongoose Publishing Ltd
  Arms of Legend, Copyright 2012, Mongoose Publishing Ltd
Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                                                                    2
                                                                                          legend
                                                                                              arms of
                                                                                                         arms of
                                                                                                        legend

                          ARMS OF LEGEND
          An adventurer is only as good as his equipment, so the saying goes – and with
          this mighty tome, your adventurer will be the best-equipped he can be. From
          new weapons and armour, to the more mundane items that keep an adventure
          going, Arms of Legend is a complete catalogue that will keep players coming
                              back for more after every adventure.




                                                  MGP 8304       US$19.99




Alex Greene (order #3215550)                                                              2.99.22.5
