Home to over 25,000 rampaging Orcs, Skarr is a city of pure brutality, a place of 
nightmare that even the bravest Adventurer will fear to tread.  Built from the ruins 
of an ancient dwarven stronghold the Orcs themselves destroyed, the hordes of Skarr 
range for miles in every direction, bringing slaughter and misery to any community 

unfortunate enough to be within range of their predations.

MGP 8310 US$19.99

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

legendcities ofskarr: city of orcslegendcities ofskarr: city of orcscities of

LEGEND

skarr: city of orcs

Credits  

Original Author
Wil Upchurch

Developer
Bryan Steele

Editor
Charlotte Law

Layout 
Jonathan Goodyer

Interior Illustrations
Pedro Potier, Jon Netherland, Vebjorn, 
Phil Renne, Gill Pearce and Chad 
Sergesketter

Contents

Introduction 

History 

Government 

Ecology 

Daily life 

Commerce 

Skaar religion 

Defences 

Tour of the city 

Movers and shakers 

Skaar in your campaign 

2

6

11

17

19

22

24

34

42

55

79

Copyright Information

Cities of Legend - Skarr: City of Orcs ©2012 Mongoose Publishing. All rights reserved. Reproduction of non-
Open Game Content of this work by any means without the written permission of the publisher is expressly 
forbidden. Legend is presented under the Open Game Licence. See page 86 for the text of this licence. All 
text paragraphs and tables containing game mechanics and statistics derivative of Open Game Content and 
the System Reference Document are considered to be Open Game Content.  All other significant characters, 

names, places, items, art and text herein are copyrighted by Mongoose Publishing.  All rights reserved.  

Printed in USA

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

introduction

Home to over 25,000 rampaging orcs, Skaar is a city of pure brutality, a place of nightmare that even 
the bravest Adventurer will fear to tread. Built from the ruins of an ancient dwarven stronghold the 
orcs themselves destroyed, the hordes of Skaar range for miles in every direction, bringing slaughter 
and misery to any community unfortunate enough to be within range of their predations.

Few dare to make their way into Skaar, for the orcs are an evil race that despise any not of their 
own kind. To travel on the plain of Skaar, or within its deep caverns, is to court death itself. No 
amount of skill in arms or magic will prevail here and yet there is much that must be discovered 
about the orcs’ organisation and overall aims. Do they intend to stay within the boundaries of 
the city? Or are the warlords of the marauding orc armies building up their strength so as to 
sweep all kingdoms before them in a murderous red tide of blood-letting and carnage?

The rulers of the city detest any interruption to their interests and the order maintained over 
the barbarous inhabitants and so ruthlessly quash all uprisings. The common orc endures much 
hardship  beneath  his  masters  and  yet  remains  loyal  to  his  race,  his  allegiance  bought  by  the 
promise of gold and the ever present threat of death. Goblins live at the bottom of the social 
strata of the city and yet even they provide no in-road for a would-be invader and vanquisher 
of orc-kind. Life within Skaar is characterised by murder, brutality, poverty and starvation, but 
no inhabitant seeks escape whilst the forces of man, dwarf and elf do their utmost to eliminate 
any weak orcish presence found beyond the boundaries of the city. The city remains an eternal 
threat to all those who hold dear the forces of righteousness and civilisation. It falls to the sword 
and wit of heroes to overcome this great menace, to perform the very acts of legend and succeed 
where entire armies might fail.

Cities of Legend

Skaar:  City  of  Orcs  heralds  an  exciting  new  series  from  Mongoose  Publishing.  Designed  to 
provide  Games  Masters  with  entire  settlements  and  communities  to  drop  into  any  existing 
campaign,  Cities  of  Legend  will  open  the  door  to  an  entire  treasure  trove  of  exciting  gaming 
sessions, made all the more memorable for the locations in which they are set. Every city within 
the series is specifically designed to inject the very element of high fantasy into any campaign. 
Skaar represents the kind of city that is often mentioned or spoken about but rarely written as a 
sourcebook, ready for Games Masters to use with their players – you now have an entire city of 
orcs to play with. Enjoy!

2

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Skaar: City of Orcs

Within this sourcebook, you will find an entire city ready to drop straight into your campaign. 
Skaar: City of Orcs is fully detailed, with maps and illustrations depicting the foul lives led by 
those  who  dwell  within.  In  addition,  Games  Masters  will  be  able  to  make  ready  use  of  the 
complete backgrounds provided for those individuals and factions who have risen above the rest 
to become dominant forces within the city, constantly vying for power with one another in a 
continued struggle set to destroy Skaar from the inside.

Skaar: City of Orcs contains enough action and adventure to keep players on their toes for many 
gaming sessions to come and an entire chapter is dedicated to enabling Games Masters to insert 
Skaar quickly and easily into their existing campaigns. One way or another, few players will ever 
forget the adventures they endure within an entire city of orcs and their foul kin.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

3

78.144.81.132

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

history

Over 700 years ago the dwarves of the Ironhallow clan were driven from their ancestral homes by 
a combined force of duergar and troglodyte invaders. They, along with several other clans of the 
shattered dwarven settlement, fled to the surface in order to find a new home. After wandering 
for several months, disagreements began to creep into the inter-clan council. The council could 
not reach a consensus on where or how to continue their search and so most families began to go 
their separate ways, with the Ironhallow being the only ones to remain above ground.

They travelled for months, lost in the land above, and many died or abandoned the clan. Some 
of those who fled were younger dwarves, hot heads who told the elders they would rather wander 
the land as adventurers than continue their quest for a new home. These became the Dispossessed 
of Ironhallow, but theirs is another tale. 

The rest continued to wander, far from their wounded home, until they eventually came upon 
a flat plain atop a great mountain. Here they rested for several days, until a scouting party later 
returned with exciting news – a crevasse had been found in the side of the mountain. Explorers 
were sent immediately and, after several days, they returned to report a large network of caverns 
within  the  mountain.  No  signs of  prior  inhabitation were  found throughout  and  one  of  the 
caverns even housed a large lake.

The dwarves rejoiced at the news. The clan elders christened their new home Ironhallow Hall 
and pronounced that forever more the day of its discovery would be a sacred holiday.

Ironhallow Hall Prospers and Grows

It  took  several  decades  to  truly  make  the  place  a  home. The  first  order  of  business  was  the 
construction and reformation of the interior caverns. The dwarves decided to leave the main 
entrance small at first to facilitate the clan’s protection and not until 200 years later did they 
finally create a grand stone archway to welcome visitors to their home.

Inevitably, the other races inhabiting the area began to notice the dwarven community. War is 
as much a way of life underground as it is on the surface and Ironhallow Hall quickly found it 
had a number of enemies in places untouched by the sun. A familiar enemy quickly became the 
predominant aggressors in the new community, for the troglodyte clan making its home nearby 
was not large but was particularly hardy for the species and relentless when battling the dwarves.

From the outside world came humans and elves, although the fair folk rarely cared for dwarven 
company. These  travellers  usually  sought  shelter  but  as  time  passed  they  started  to  come  for 
trade. The Ironhallow dwarves had discovered untapped jasper and emerald mines beneath the 
mountain, and soon found themselves beset more often with traders and merchants than lost 
adventurers and rangers.

6

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

The clan elders feared for the safety of their people and wished to preserve the sanctity of the 
hall in the face of increased traffic. They ordered construction start outside the hall on the plain 
they had settled decades before, now referred to as the Hearth Plain. Structure after structure was 
erected and in little time a thriving town lay just outside the dwarven city. Taverns and inns were 
almost as numerous as shops devoted to trade, crafts and goods, and over the next three centuries 
Ironhallow Hall prospered under this busy trade.

The Horde Descends

Just over a century ago, three dwarven rangers arrived at Ironhallow Hall just in advance of a 
rampaging orc horde. The horde had already smashed several settlements within a few miles of 
the hall and was quickly ascending to the Hearth Plain. Defences were hastily mounted as the cry 
of invasion rang through the caverns. Many of the town’s visitors fled, seeking shelter and safety 
with their own people. A few others stayed to help defend Ironhallow. 

These brave few included Acheroi’s Stalwarts, a human mercenary band resting after a rigorous 
campaign against the troglodytes beneath the mountain, and the Sai’chin, a feared group of elven 
archers whose reputation for both accuracy and bravery was known throughout the land. Erik 
de Galhart, a paladin whose star was on the rise within his order, made his final stand with the 
Ironhallow dwarves too. One member of his retinue, Pangrath, survived the battle and it is his 
writings that provide one of the main sources of information about these bloody days.

The orcs struck quick and hard. They roiled into the city in a seething, evil mass, cutting down 
defenders and burning homes and shops. Several units of dwarf crossbowmen and infantry had 
been stationed in the outer city, their grim duty to slow down the horde whilst those inside 
prepared to defend their home. These forces included the elven archers, whose deaths are given 
solemn remembrance by Pangrath alongside the dwarven fallen.

It was not long before the Hearth Plain fell to the invaders and the horde showed no signs of 
stopping or reinforcing its position. The orc warlords pushed their troops onward, executing any 
orc who stopped to loot or plunder. By nightfall, the orcs had secured the entry halls but the 
stalwart dwarven defenders, supported by powerful chanters and priests, had managed to stay 
the momentum of the horde. As the moon reached its apex, the orc warlords finally called a halt 
and posted units to shore up their positions. The first day of battle was over.

The dwarves worked through the night to gather children and other non-combatants, readying the 
groups to descend into the caverns if the orcs overwhelmed the Hall’s defenders. Phalanx after phalanx 
of dwarven infantrymen, crossbowmen, chanters and battle priests arranged themselves for the orcs’ 
next assault. They knew that being underground gave them no advantage, for the orcs could see as 
well as they in the sunless realms. The dwarves and their allies steeled themselves, comforted with the 
thought that dying in defence of the clan-home would make them heroes in the afterlife.

Before sunrise, the attack came again. Orcs poured in droves through Ironhallow Hall as the 
defenders  desperately  attempted  to  push  them  back.  Dozens  of  invaders  fell  at  the  hastily 
constructed walls, although twice as many remained to fill the empty space. The dwarves, pressed 
back deep into their caverns, had failed to spot a second horde arriving from the southern valley. 
This orc army had been delayed as it tried to cross the Valley of the Sphinxes and after a day and 
a half of negotiation was allowed to pass. 

Beset by an endless tide of invaders, the dwarves assigned two regiments to lead the children and 
elders away from Ironhallow Hall. The ancestors of those who founded the great clan-home were 
on the move once more but vowed to some day return and enact their vengeance.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

7

78.144.81.132

Orc Rule

It took several more days for the orcs to root out the last of the stubborn defenders, as each 
dwarf fought to his dying breath. Looting and celebration took place alongside the execution of 
surviving clansmen. Dwarves were forced to watch as their enemies took over their homes, ate 
their food and destroyed their belongings.

The orc warlords themselves marched into the defeated city on the ninth day of the attack. This 
was just as their shaman had predicted – one day of battle for each of the fingers of the Maimed 
Lord, followed by victory in his name. They ordered a parade of the captured dwarves and cut off 
the fourth finger of each of their hands. They then turned them loose, the sacrifice complete.

Few  buildings  remained  intact  in  the  outer  city  and  many  still  spat  smoke  into  the  sky  as 
scavengers picked over the battlefield. Twisted harpies and goblins were among those picking the 
dead clean of flesh and gold. Ironhallow Hall itself was more a charnel house than a former dwarf 
cavern. Thousands of dead bodies littered the floor and Craddush Lake, once the lifeblood of the 
dwarven community, now ran red with the very blood it once nourished.

The orc warlords claimed what buildings were left as their own, leaving the horde to find shelter 
within the mountain. They had little knowledge of what lay within the mountain passages but 
realised they had come to the end of their journey.

The City is Rebuilt

The army ate better than it had in months, feasting daily on the bodies of their fallen enemies. 
The orcs cleaned out the passages of Ironhallow Hall and brought valuables to the outer city for 
the warlords to admire and squabble over. Great mounds of treasure were scraped from within 
the  halls. The  stronger  orcs  took  the  best  caverns  for  themselves,  whilst  others  instinctively 

8

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

banded  together  to  ensure  themselves  a  good  base. The  warlords  realised  the  horde  was  not 
travelling further and decided to call Ironhallow their new home. Messengers were sent to orc 
encampments across the land and thousands upon thousands of orcs descended upon the new 
city. Crude tents and fire pits dotted the Hearth Plain as orcs awaited the word to move into their 
new home. More arrived daily, often with tribes of goblins in tow.

Meanwhile,  the  orc  army  had  cleaned  out  the  underground  halls,  converting  smithies  and 
foundries into kitchens and storage rooms. The trading post, one of the few buildings remaining 
intact after the assault, became the home of the powerful shaman of the horde who advised its 
warlords. After a few years, the caverns became choked with orcs, so the army moved out of the 
city to make way for the overflow. They encamped a mile from the main city, just on the edge of 
the Hearth Plain and the warlords gave over control of the settlement to a City Master and left 
a small contingent of troops to keep order and support his will. This form of government still 
exists in the city, although tensions between the incumbent City Master and the captain of the 
troops threatens to erode the stability of the entire city.

Fury of the Maimed Lord

For two generations the orcs lived in their new city, now renamed Skaar. The warlords found their 
horde dispersing as the attrition of peacetime slowly shrunk their force for fighting was common 
both in the outer city and inside the caverns, and roving bands of thugs and hoodlums made it a 
chaotic and violent place. A new shaman, Akrilla, predicted that a great catastrophe would befall 
the city, whose leaders grew fat and lazy whilst its people wasted their good fortune.

This prediction was to come true in a murderous fashion. Great black clouds were seen forming 
through the peaks of nearby mountains, growing larger as they moved toward the city. The warlords, 
nervous because of Akrilla’s frightening prognostication, ordered all troops to break camp and take 
shelter away from Skaar. It was the last time many would see their mountainside home.

The  storm  descended  furiously  on  Skaar,  pelting  the  outer  city  with  large  drops  of  rain  and 
hail the size of an orc’s fist. The wind blew so hard that the orcs’ desperate cries were lost in 
the maelstrom and those that took shelter within the mountain were granted but a temporary 
reprieve, one that would last only hours. Soon, water began dripping through the ceiling in many 
of the halls, and in many places the rocks burst open to allow great torrents of water to barrel 
through the city.

The storm subsided after a half day of destruction, the clouds seemingly dissipating into the 
great, black sky. The army moved back to the Hearth Plain to survey the damage and many of 
the orcs spread further destruction in fits of anger and rage. The warlords immediately sought 
Akrilla, thinking she had brought this disaster on with her precognition. Although protesting 
they had not heeded her warning, the orcs demanded her blood and Akrilla was forced to flee 
the city using magic to escape her pursuers, and lost herself deep within a nearby swamp. She 
remains in exile to this day, watching over the city that unfairly punished her, torn between her 
desire for revenge and her servitude of the orcs’ cruel god.

Being superstitious and not fully convinced that Akrilla’s visions were indeed false, the warlords 
wasted no time in raising their army once more. They told the assembled horde that they must 
destroy in their god’s name or be destroyed themselves by his vengeance. Something awakened in 
the orcs that had lain dormant for many years and the horde was on the move once more.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

9

78.144.81.132

The Aftermath

With the horde gone and the city in near ruin, orcs from around the region began again to 
migrate to Skaar. Although a small military contingent had been left behind under the command 
of a young orc named Grogan Thral, authority in the city was weakened and many orcs saw the 
opportunity to grab power in the void. The most notable of these was Cylus Groon, a vicious 
and gluttonous orc who would stop at nothing to fulfil his desires. He assembled a dedicated 
group of followers who ensured that his rivals were in no condition to contest his control over 
rebuilding the city.

Skaar was slowly rebuilt using labour from nearby tribes of goblins, hobgoblins and trolls to 
speed the process. Cylus Groon and his men arranged all of this, further solidifying his position 
as civil leader of Skaar but whilst Grogan Thral and his men disliked Groon’s tactics, and resented 
the presence of hobgoblins and trolls in their midst, they had their orders from the warlords and 
so co-operated.

The Present Day

Portions of the horde return to Skaar every few months, to refresh their numbers and bring loot 
to be stored within the city’s deepest vaults. Meanwhile, those that live in Skaar go about their 
lives.  Some  of  the  hobgoblins  and  trolls  that  helped  rebuild  the  city  remained  and  the  ever-
present goblins still eke out a living from the scraps of the orcs. Cylus Groon and his cronies 
run the entire city, having suitably impressed visiting warlords with their quick rise to power 
and ability to maintain control. Grogan Thral watches Groon from afar but does not bring his 
concerns to the warlords, knowing they would likely strip him of his command, or worse. The 
descendants of those orcs displaced still seethe over their past defeat, waiting in the shadows for 
a time to strike.

Thus it stands today, a once proud dwarven outpost reduced to a slop pit for the families of those 
that destroyed it.

10

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

government

Civil government in any orc city is a loose affiliation of powerful and ambitious orcs with the 
backing of the most powerful tribes and chieftains. Skaar is no exception to this. The single most 
powerful orc in Skaar is a fat, ruthless schemer named Cylus Groon. 

Groon first came to power in the wake of the devastating storm that nearly destroyed the city 
25 years before. From then his unyielding grip on the city’s operations has shown no sign of 
slipping. In times past he was a young, pugnacious orc with a reputation for travelling with a 
rough crowd of rowdy drinkers and thugs. He often displayed a cruel imagination and stomach 
for  trouble  that  frightened  even  the  seasoned  criminals  among  his  gang  but  underneath  this 
disgusting exterior, however, lay a keen and ambitious mind.

When the storm came, Groon and his cohorts took shelter in the caves along with the rest of 
the city. There they plotted ways to profit from the chaos and destruction, talking of looting 
destroyed structures and bullying those that found themselves without shelter. Groon, however, 
had another plan. Rather than risking the wrath of the returning army, why not aid them regain 
order? Although this did not sound like fun to the majority of his gang, Groon eventually won 
them over with promises of power and riches gained with impunity. After the storm receded, 
they immediately began ‘organising’ work groups to bring order to the blasted city. They beat 
orcs and goblins alike, forcing them to work night and day and report to Groon regularly.

Groon and his men spent the rest of their time eliminating any who would stand in the way 
of their rise to power. Many of the town’s leaders had been killed during the storm but others 
remained, and it was these that Groon primarily saw as his rivals. Several ‘accidents’ later and 
most of the would-be opposition had been taken care of permanently. While his men did most 
of his dirty work, and often took the fall for their behaviour, Groon travelled to a nearby tribe 
of hobgoblins in order to broker an agreement. He paid them a sum of gold and the promise of 
further remuneration in exchange for a few dozen of their men to aid in the rebuilding of Skaar. 
Although potentially more dangerous than the hobgoblins, Groon also made the same a deal 
with a nearby group of trolls.

He returned to the city with a retinue of strong and loyal followers, although he convinced the 
orc warlords he had merely brought in aid at great personal expense. Further challenges to his 
authority were not forthcoming and, with the horde leaving soon to resume its plundering and 
destruction, Groon was firmly entrenched as the civil leader of Skaar.

Groon’s Government

Groon has managed to build a loyal network of followers during his tenure as City Master. The 
surviving members of his original gang form a close inner circle that provides the muscle behind his 
rule. Their numbers have been augmented by new recruits over the years, even including a half-orc 
who proved his worth by killing his human mother when she travelled to Skaar to find him.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

11

78.144.81.132

These enforcers, known as the Silver Tusks, wade through the city in small gangs, rooting out 
any signs of dissatisfaction or antipathy toward their leader. They see failure to pay regular tribute 
to Groon, for all the good works he performs, as a sure sign of dissatisfaction and offenders 
are beaten and intimidated, depending on their standing within the community. Those found 
taking their complaints to the guard under Grogan Thral are treated far more severely. Groon’s 
men take what they want when they want it but they are careful not to abuse this privilege. They 
know that if they are too blatant, Groon will be forced to make an example of one or more of 
them to appease the warlords by whose grace he rules. These gangs give a wide berth to those 
who show influence with Grogan Thral or the other military leaders.

Groon has other sympathetic followers within Skaar as well. A small community of hobgoblins 
has  grown  around  the  original  group  that  were  brought  in  to  aid  in  the  rebuilding  process. 
Around 150 of the creatures now make Skaar their home and they have formed their own tribe 
with  the  blessing  of  their  former  chieftain. This  tribe  is  moderately  loyal  to  Groon  and  his 
company, although some of its younger members show an independent streak that has the orc 
City Master on edge.

Many of the goblins in the city are under his employ, usually as thieves, messengers or labourers. 
They are not necessarily loyal to Groon, being simply dependent on him for wages and food. 
Some of the more unfortunate goblins end up as food themselves, for those who displease Groon 
are fed to the trolls he keeps as guardians and labourers.
 

Groon’s Goals

Groon  desires  nothing  but  power  over  as  many  orcs  as  possible.  He  was  far  too  lazy  to  join 
the  hordes  that  periodically  terrorise  the  surrounding  lands,  so  he  chose  a  different  route  to 
power, one easily afforded to him when the horde left Skaar. Since then he has enriched his 
personal coffers at the expense of the city, whilst maintaining at least the façade of performing 
governmental duties. He keeps the streets free of chaos and violence (for the most part) and 
polices the city’s main resources, namely water, weapons and material goods.

Despite all of Groon’s flaws, he is a reasonably efficient City Master. There have been no major 
internal conflicts under his rule and several attacks upon the city have been rebuffed through his 
leadership and that of Grogan Thral. Normal life continues in the city without much disturbance. 
The open market flourishes, especially when the orcs of the horde return with plundered goods 
and gold, and few orcs desire to leave the city once they arrive. Groon himself answers only to the 
orcish warlords that visit the city from time-to-time, in particular Warmaster Thak who retains 
the ultimate authority to have Groon removed. The warlords as a whole have determined Groon 
to be a satisfactory caretaker of the city and do not bother themselves with inquiries regarding 
his methods or motivations. Grogan Thral has repeatedly expressed his concerns but each time 
he is met with little more than a shrug. He has been informed in no uncertain terms that he is 
to do whatever he can to ensure the stability and defence of the city and that includes seeing to 
the safety of Cylus Groon.

Notable Authority Figures

The second most powerful orc in Skaar is Grogan Thral, leader of the standing army of Skaar. 
Thral is an unusually intelligent orc who despises Cylus Groon for his gluttonous and conniving 
ways. He believes orcs in leadership should be fit and able to defend their own interests, not 
rely on a cadre of bullies and informants to monitor their affairs. However, he is bound by the 
warlords to provide a regular guard to Groon, which he does but uses this position to gather 
information  about  the  City  Master.  He  secretly  tries  to  undermine  Groon’s  rule  but  is  very 

12

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

‘I want you to kill him. Then bring his body to me so I may defile it properly.’

Groon gave the order as if he were ordering a pint of ale from a waitress, fully expectant that his 
wish would soon be fulfilled without the slightest hesitation.

‘Yes, Groon, he will be dead before morning,’ said the tall, muscular orc standing in the doorway. 
‘By the way, I thought your take-over of the southern land holdings was masterfully performed.’ 
The orc then formed a meaty fist and thumped his chest, the common salute used by orcs from 
the horde.

‘I’ve told you not to do that around me,’ said Cylus. He grabbed the wall next to him and hoisted 
his corpulent form out of the chair in which he was sat. ‘I am not a warlord, nor do I have the 
desire to be. If I wanted to I could make it happen, of that there is no doubt, but I will leave such 
strenuous work to orcs like your warlord Grimlir.’

‘Whatever you say, Cylus’ said the other orc. Alodai be damned, I hate this Groon. Still, he is the 
most powerful orc in the city and there is an obvious connection between he and warlord Grimlir. ‘I 
will bring your cousin’s body and those of any who stand in my way.’

Groon watched the orc as he receded into the hallway. ‘There is one who will go far,’ he said 
to the burly orc with silver tusk caps standing next to him. ‘He has just the proper amount of 
respect, and the proper amount of ambition.’ Groon turned to his aide and gave him a serious 
look. ‘He is not to leave this building alive.’

The other orc nodded and with a silent grin he drew his axe and stepped off into the darkness. 

careful not to implicate himself in any uncovered plots. One slip is all he needs to remove Groon 
from power but so far no opportunity has presented itself.

The leader of the orc army, Warmaster Thak, also wields great power in the city when he is in 
residence. His word is law and even Groon keeps a low profile during these times. At times when 
he is off leading the horde, he entrusts the military duties of Skaar to Thral, who has proven a 
capable and enthusiastic leader. Warmaster Thak is aware of some of the tactics used by Groon 
in his rise to power but he keeps himself wilfully ignorant of current activities. So long as the city 
functions as well as it has, he cares little as to what its leaders or citizens are doing. In his own 
opinion the city is no more than a place to bring the loot his horde captures and provide a fresh 
recruiting pool for more warriors.

The Opposition

The only serious threats to Groon’s rule are the machinations of Grogan Thral and the ever-present 
menace of the dwarven resistance. Grogan Thral has several plans in motion that he hopes will 
slowly erode the power of his corpulent rival. First, he ensures any orcs sent to guard Groon are 
loyal only to him. This guard provides information on Groon’s movements and plans, allowing 
Thral to devise counter-schemes to hinder Groon’s growing operations. He also knows the Silver 
Tusks do not target businesses with ties to him or his forces and so he has created a number of 
interests in the city run by orcs retired from his army. By channelling more commercial activity into 
areas the City Master cannot touch, he forces Groon to siphon less gold to his personal coffers.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

13

78.144.81.132

The  dwarves  living  near  the  underground  caverns  of  Skaar  are  also  a  thorn  in  Groon’s  side. 
They plot constantly to sabotage the orcs in what they still consider to be their city. Ambushing 
the deepest orc patrols, they steal both equipment and food whenever they can. The resistance 
includes the Warriors of the Nine, a group descended from the dwarves who lost their fingers to 
the orcs’ dark god. These stealthy warriors have attempted to assassinate both Groon and Thral 
in the past but such missions have always failed.

New Heroic Ability: Warrior of the Nine
Prerequisites: CHA 13; must be of a dwarven race
Hero Points: 10
Duration: Permanent

The  Warriors  of  the  Nine  are  a  group  of  dwarven  fighters  descended  from  those  who  were 
mutilated by the Mended Ones during the initial invasion of Ironhallow Hall by the orc hordes. 
Numbering  more  than  nine,  they  have  carried  the  weight  of  their  fathers’  and  grandfathers’ 
humiliation  down  through  the  ages  and  their  close  tie  to  the  ancestors  grants  extraordinary 
powers and abilities.

You now roll an additional 1D6 for all damage rolls against orcs and goblins, as well as gain 
+20% to all Weapon skills against these targets.

The Functions of Government

Groon  runs  the  government  from  a  converted  trading  post,  once  the  largest  in  the  original 
dwarven  city.  He  spends  much  of  his  time  organising  the  daily  business  of  Skaar,  including 
monitoring the work crews, keeping up to date on the Lake Guard and even more importantly 
taking reports from his men on the state of his personal affairs. 

Most orcs do not care to work for Groon, so they take full advantage of the other races living in 
Skaar. The primary labourers in the city are goblins, who perform mostly as waste disposal and 
other forms of slave labour. Most often, the goblins are happy to work for the city as it is the most 
reliable source of income they can hope for in Skaar. Those that do not work in this capacity are 
often forced to steal or settle for slave wages where they can get them, but most often are thrown 
onto a work crew where they live in servitude. The tribe of hobgoblins is far more self-sufficient 
and organised than the goblins. They have a standing contract with the city to produce metal 
goods, including armour and weapons, and they grow a good portion of their own food within 
the boundaries of their settlement.

Sometimes Groon is asked to resolve disputes between citizens and, as often as not, will make 
judgement  against  both  participants,  thus  limiting  the  amount  of  time  he  spends  on  such 
endeavours. The  result  is  that  vigilantism  and  hired  ‘trouble-shooters’  are  the  most  common 
and reliable form of justice in the city. When Groon does make judgement against a citizen it 
most often results in time on a work crew, not a good prospect because of the cruelty of the crew 
masters. Fines are rare because of the relative poverty of the city’s denizens but they can be levied 
on the spot when it is deemed necessary or when the target is known to be wealthy.

14

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Groon’s Business Interests
Groon has firmly entrenched his own interests with that of Skaar.

•  Groon personally owns a portion of the habitable area on the Hearth Plain, as well as several 
caverns within the mountain. He charges a fair price for using his land, although he also 
takes a percentage of any commercial enterprise performed by his tenants. This is one of the 
few legitimate business interests that Groon presides over.
The hobgoblins overcharge the city for their metalworking and blacksmithing, and pay a 
percentage back to Groon as ‘craftsman fees’.

• 

•  Groon draws a salary from the city treasury, as well as paying his cronies as city servants. 

• 

• 

They have several funds from which they can draw gold and do so liberally.
The Silver Tusks solicit protection money from nearly all of the city’s traders and craftsmen. 
They  are  careful  not  to  demand  too  much  and  if  any  are  caught  overcharging  they  are 
beaten and expelled from the Silver Tusks.
A group of goblin thieves works under the Silver Tusks and pays them a percentage of their 
take, most of which goes directly to Groon.

Other  law  enforcement  in  the  city  is  carried  out  by  either Thral’s  men  or  the  Silver Tusks, 
depending on who is in the area at the time. The Tusks always defer to the military in order to 
avoid any confrontation that could reflect poorly on the City Master. Thral is fair but harsh and 
will not hesitate to send an offender to the work crews or the army.

Crime and Punishment

The  attitude  of  Skaar’s  citizens  is  that  nothing  is  criminal  until  you  are  discovered.  Getting 
caught will earn the unfortunate culprit the following punishments.

Theft
Assigned to a work crew, for a period of up to six months.*

Murder
Depending on Groon’s mood and his disposition to the orc in question, this may or may not 
result in work crew servitude.

Bringing False Accusations
Time on a work crew. This punishment is often handed to both the plaintiff and the defendant, 
regardless of how the case is adjudicated. Groon really does not care about the legitimacy of a 
complaint and this law only exists so he can rid himself of more orcs by punishing them under 
this statute.

Damaging City Property
Expulsion from the city or death on the spot, depending on the mood and demeanour of the orc 
who caught the offender. Either is acceptable by law. The beaters of the church of Alodai also 
carry out this punishment with pleasure.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

15

78.144.81.132

Consorting with an Enemy of Skaar
Death. Enemies of Skaar include any race not welcomed into the city.

* Military service may be substituted for getting sent to a work crew, if the guilty party desires it, 
although the minimum term of service is one year. In this case he is left free until the next horde 
arrives. Subsequently avoiding this military duty results in execution at the hands of Thral.

These are the only crimes that warrant serious punishment in Skaar, where law does not reign 
in any great fashion. Groon and the Silver Tusks answer only to their own laws and are free to 
break these as they wish though Groon does monitor the behaviour of his servants and egregious 
lawbreakers will be dealt with permanently.

16

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

ecology

Living in Skaar is not easy for the vast majority of its inhabitants. The city lacks many of the 
basic provisions necessary for life, including an abundant food source. Water and living space 
are also in great demand, although these are more easily come by than food or even safety. Those 
that live well do so at the expense of others, leaving many of the orcs and goblins of Skaar to die 
of starvation or disease. Survivors often master the art of scavenging their basic needs from the 
discarded waste of those above them whilst thieves generally take what they need where they can 
find it; many others are forced to submit themselves to the work crews voluntarily just to subsist 
on the meagre rations provided by the city.

Skaar is barely self-sufficient, as is the case for most permanent orcish settlements. It relies heavily 
on plunder brought back by the hordes and on banditry perpetrated by its permanent citizens. 
There is no permanent water supply above ground, so the orcs must retrieve their water from 
deep within the bowels of the city where an underground stream feeds the lake. The lake itself is 
under permanent heavy guard, as dwarven guerrillas, troglodytes and other underground perils 
constantly vie for this important water source.

The leader of this city is a foul, bloated orc named Cylus Groon. He is an unusually savvy orc, 
given to bouts of extreme cruelty even as he uses cunning and sneaky diplomacy to keep himself 
firmly entrenched as the highest orc. He exercises complete authority over the city, although 
most orcs try to ignore his pronouncements and go about their daily lives. The captain of the 
city’s defenders, Grogan Thral, sees Groon as a gluttonous buffoon but also recognises the threat 
that Groon would pose if he were to openly question the authority. Both are subordinate to the 
Hordemaster when he is in residence and the town resembles a military encampment more than 
a civilian city.

Food and Water

Water  is  relatively  plentiful  due  to  the  underground  lake  that  sits  on  the  city’s  outskirts  but 
it is still rationed by the permanent garrison under Thral. The many subterranean races that 
utilise the water source battle constantly for dominance of the caverns around the lake, so it is 
imperative for the city’s security that common orcs not be allowed to move freely around them. 
They must also ensure the lake’s water remains fresh and pure, as the despoliation of the lake 
would surely mean an end to Skaar. 

Orcs are given ration chips, small black tokens made of baked animal waste, which they can 
exchange for water at stations throughout the undercity. One ration chip is good for one meagre 
week’s worth of water for a single orc. These chips can also be purchased on the black market for 
a high price (this is one of the most lucrative businesses in Skaar) and in some areas of the city 
are worth more than their weight in silver. A desperate orc might part with a ration chip for as 
little as two gold pieces but more likely they would be acquired through the black market at a 
cost of six to ten gold pieces each.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

17

78.144.81.132

Food  is  a  major  concern  for  a  city  this  large,  especially  one  with  no  real  trading  partners  or 
agriculture, and the mountainous terrain in which the orcs live affords them little opportunity to 
hunt or fish. Therefore, the orcs of Skaar have become adept at scavenging the surrounding area 
for food and many of them hunt for game in the caverns below the Hearth Plain.

Skaar’s only outside source for food is the hobgoblin tribe from which Cylus Groon originally 
recruited the warband that now lives in the city. They bring food from the wilderness, as well 
as captured stores of grain and livestock from nearby human villages and towns. The food is 
transferred from hobgoblin to orc and then on to Groon himself. By the time it reaches the 
common inhabitants of Skaar its price has been outrageously inflated.

Some of Skaar’s inhabitants have taken to raising small edible animals such as rabbits and rats 
that are then sold live, dead or cooked, on the open market. Rat meat is the most plentiful found 
in Skaar. Swarms of the rodents scurry about in the dark because of the city’s filthy environment 
and a larger dire race has been growing in numbers for years. 

Shelter

Shelter is another concern for the orcs of Skaar, since the city’s population greatly exceeds the 
living space afforded by the caverns below. The Hearth Plain is nearly at capacity also, making 
its habitable area both valuable and limited. The filth and squalor in which much of Skaar’s 
populace live further reduces the available space because waste dumps and gravesites have sprung 
up all over the city. With no formal plan in place to deal with these issues, vast areas of the 
Hearth Plain have been made uninhabitable. Those who live on the Hearth Plain know Skaar to 
be a vastly different place from those who live underground and vice versa.

The undercity is a sheltered environment, free from the worries of the frequent storms that pelt 
the city. Although it is perpetually chilly in the caverns, those living below do not have to deal 
with climactic changes and sudden weather patterns. Those who can afford cavern space below the 
Hearth Plain generally decline to build structures in which to live as the caves themselves provide 
cover from wind and storms. However, walls or doorways are often built into private caverns to 
dissuade casual theft and valuable items are kept hidden in caches within the stone walls.

It is easier to live without a permanent home in the caverns, because unclaimed space can be 
squatted more easily. Although Groon owns much of the undercity, as he does the Hearth Plain, 
the Silver Tusks are much more active on the surface. The heavy presence of Grogan Thral’s 
guard dissuade the Silver Tusks from openly conducting their business in the undercity with any 
frequency and squatters can usually count on protection in the short term, even if they will be 
forced to pay bribes to Thral himself.

Life on the surface is much tougher for the citizens of Skaar. They are under the immediate 
scrutiny and control of Cylus Groon and his Silver Tusks, and must face the ever-present danger 
and annoyance of heavy storms, animal attacks and even raids. Less than a dozen structures were 
spared the torch during the battle in which the orcs won control over the city.

18

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

daily life

Life in Skaar is a daily struggle for survival. While some orcs are able to carve out a decent life 
in the city, it is almost always at the expense of others. Stronger orcs tend to punish the weak or 
sickly, taking what they want without regard. This forces weaker orcs to band together and often 
they pay protection money to the Silver Tusks, or some other group of stronger orcs, simply to 
be left alone. Bullying and thuggery are especially prevalent any time a large group of horde orcs 
returns from their plundering. In order to prevent this abuse from becoming widespread, the 
warlords have enacted strict policies of separation between the hordes and the city. This is the 
reason for the fenced area at the edge of the Hearth Plain where horde orcs are forced to stay 
when they return to the city.

Since there is no organised agriculture in Skaar (aside from the Ugreckt, who have many small 
gardens  to  supplement  their  hunting),  the  orcs  rely  on  captured  goods  and  hunting  for  their 
sustenance. This creates a harsh environment in a city this large and most orcs have found a way to 
scrape by even in the leanest of times. The Mended Ones tell the people their poverty and hunger 
is a sign from Alodai that the orcs are not being true to their nature. Orcs are made to conquer and 
destroy, not lazily inhabit a city where no terror is to be wrought. However, no matter what the 
shamen say, those orcs who do live in Skaar need to live. To this end many orcs have learned the art 
of scavenging, or finding a way to live where little living is to be made. These scavengers generally 
take on two forms – those that live alone and make their way about the city on their wits and 
cunning, and those that are adept at living off the discards of more successful or affluent orcs.

The first are the archetypal poor orc, clothes tattered and teeth rotting from a deprived diet and 
poor health. These unfortunates barely sustain themselves by begging and foraging through the 
discards of other orcs. They often go for days with nothing to eat but the grasses of the Hearth 
Plain  or  the  occasional  scrapings  of  moss  and  fungi  from  the  cavern  walls  of  the  undercity. 
The true scavengers are far more cunning, however, and it is often impossible to tell they use 

New Heroic Ability

Expert Scavenger
Prerequisites: CON 14; Survival 55%
Hero Points: 8
Duration: A number of consecutive months equal to CON plus POW. 

You  are  able  to  live  on  almost  nothing,  finding  sustenance  where  you  can  and  utilising  the 
discards and garbage of others. You need never spend money on food and drink. In addition, 
given a week, you can acquire any mundane item worth 5 gold pieces or less for free.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

19

78.144.81.132

intelligent tactics to survive. These clever orcs attempt to befriend more successful orcs and use 
this affiliation to their advantage. These orcs gain entrance to parties and meetings where food 
and  drink  are  served,  stealing  excess  away  for  later  consumption. They  make  their  way  into 
organisations whose membership can be counted on for a meal or a helpful fist of gold in lean 
times. Their scam is to appear as if they do not need help, thereby making it easier to convince 
people to help them.

The  consumption  of  alcoholic  beverages  ranks  as  a  favourite  pastime  for  all  orcs  of  Skaar, 
especially those from the hordes visiting the city. The dwarven stores of ale and wine that were 
kept in the caverns beneath the Hearth Plain were one of the greatest finds for the orcs that 
invaded the city. Too heavy to carry with them as they retreated, the ale represented a treasure 
the dwarves were forced to leave behind in the wake of their defeat. Most of these stores were 
depleted in the days of celebration following the successful invasion but the warlords managed to 
hide some of the barrels away for their private stores. Some of these hidden caches were sold or 
transferred to heirs upon the deaths of the original warlords but there are tales among the city’s 
elite telling of caverns full of barrels that remain intact and ownerless to this day. Cylus Groon 
has made it a high priority to find these lost barrels of ale and wine, as the prices they would fetch 
from the warlords and other city leaders would be considerable.

Unable to rely on regular shipments of alcohol from the horde, who are not quick to give up 
their spirits, the orcs were forced to brew their own grog using local ingredients. After years of 
experimentation with roots and herbs, the orcs found what they required below the earth. A 
dark grey mushroom grows in many of the caverns beneath the Hearth Plain and after the siege 
the orcs quickly found them to be inedible, causing acute abdominal pains if eaten either raw or 
cooked. It was for this reason that it took so long for the orcs to figure out that when properly 
distilled, the mushrooms would produce a strong, bitter brew. The orcs call this dark concoction 
grokk and the citizens of Skaar have learned to favour this drink above all else. It certainly beats 
another captured consignment of disgusting elven wine.

As has already been discussed, many orcs do not worry about survival because they simply take 
what they need from their weaker neighbours. Individual orcs take it upon themselves to use 
stealth to acquire the goods of others but for the most part thievery is left to the goblins. There is 
no established thieves’ guild in the city of Skaar but there is a group of goblins who live together 
and co-ordinate their efforts. Whilst not officially a guild, this organisation has made them far 
more successful than their more individualistic counterparts.

20

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

The goblins that live at the edge of the Hearth Plain are also frequently found on the work crews 
that perform most of the hard labour within the city. A Silver Tusk, or other government official, 
needs no reason or justification to throw a goblin on the work crew and once assigned it is nearly 
impossible to gain release. Goblins work side-by-side with orcs on these crews and this is the 
one place in Skaar where all receive equal treatment. Work crews are usually made of between 
12 and 20 individuals, all under the supervision of a brutish taskmaster. They are responsible for 
keeping the city free of waste and garbage, as well as making repairs to important buildings and 
the defensive structures along the edge of the Hearth Plain. Every few weeks, a dozen or so work 
crews are taken down the mountain to cut logs from the forest and retrieve plants, herbs and peat 
from the swamp on the western end of the mountain base.

In the caverns beneath the Hearth Plain, the work crews haul rocks and rubble, as the orcs are 
continually excavating new caverns as well as those buried by the dwarves during the invasion. 
They are also used to collect water from Lake Craddush so other orcs can avoid the dangers of 
that area. The large number of goblins lost at the shores of the lake account for the many zombies 
controlled by the disciples of the Asphibyiex.

Life in Skaar is even tougher for the orc children of the city, who lack both the strength and 
cunning to defend themselves from adults who show little mercy. The harshness of their existence 
is reflected in a popular children’s game in Skaar known as Ackabar. Ackabar begins with a group 
of children climbing up to one of the numerous ridges that cover the cliff face of the mountain 
where they then pair off, before attempting to throw each other to the ground below. The game 
pauses when an orc child flies off the ledge, as the others scramble to watch the impact. Unless 
the loser breaks a bone, goes unconscious or dies the game continues. Outside observers of this 
brutal pastime use it to justify the destruction of the orc race, citing the violence of even the 
children as proof that the race entire is evil to the core.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

21

78.144.81.132

commerce

In commercial terms, Skaar is an island. The orcs living in the city see very little foreign commerce 
due to both their isolation and aggressive nature. The humans and elves that once traded with the 
dwarves of Ironhallow Hall now shun the area, unwilling to enter into any agreement with the orcs 
and fearful of the consequences of even short term dealings. Even the independent merchants who 
once made the mountainside plain a regular and profitable waystop along their usual trade routes 
have stopped coming here. A few early violent incidences with the orcs convinced them and those 
that came after that trading with Skaar was far too costly to consider. 

The  nature  of  the  orcs  themselves  would  make  it  difficult  to  establish  trade  relations  with 
outsiders were this ever the inclination of the City Master and warlords. Even distant orc and 
other humanoid tribes make poor trading partners, as they tend to be just as treacherous as those 
in Skaar. Another problem standing in the way of trade is the almost total lack of natural resources 
and produced goods in Skaar. The orcs simply create nothing of value to any other community. 
If an orc needs something, he takes it, either from another orc or a nearby settlement. It is much 
more in keeping with the nature of orcs to conquer and plunder rather than open the channels of 
commerce other races find so valuable. The orcs are consumers of the highest order, taking from 
the land and people around them without contributing anything valuable in return. 

The most regular source of income for the city is the large amount of treasure brought back by 
successful warlords. Most of this ends up in the city’s coffers one way or another as Groon is 
quite adept at funnelling much of this into city expense funds and the like. Still, some of the loot 
gets distributed to the families and friends of orcs returning from the horde. The Hordemaster 
himself pockets a fair amount of coin by making himself the intermediary for such transactions, 
since horde orcs are rarely allowed within the city proper. All things considered, he is relatively 
honest in these transactions, merely taking a cut of whatever he is transporting into the city. 

The city’s internal economic system is far more robust than its trade concerns. There are rich 
and poor in Skaar just as in any city but the determining factors of wealth are far different from 
a  human  settlement  or  dwarven  kingdom.  Rather  than  skill  and  hard  work  determining  an 
individual orc’s success, the denizens of Skaar rely on cunning and brute strength to establish 
their  pecking  order.  At  the  top  of  the  chain  stands  Cylus  Groon,  along  with  his  network  of 
cronies, cohorts and servants. As the City Master, Groon is responsible for the distribution of 
city funds as well as payroll and business. 

He  also  oversees  the  distribution  of  land  both  on  the  Hearth  Plain  and  within  the  caverns 
beneath, a position he utilises to the greatest advantage. As there is no real private land ownership 
in Skaar, acquiring prime real estate necessitates dealing with Groon. Those that find themselves 

22

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

in  the  good  graces  of  Groon,  whether  through  favourable  business  dealings,  alliances  or  flat 
bribery, always have an easy time gaining access to favourable locations. Groon is wise enough 
to grant the best caverns and lairs to the warlords and their favoured minions, especially those 
affiliated with Bakka Grimlir. The rest are open for sale and sometimes new buyers become quite 
attached to their high priced living spaces.

Much of the city’s commerce occurs in two places, the Field and the underground market. The 
market is an abandoned dwarven amphitheatre, where orcs lay out their goods on blankets and 
seek to sell or trade with the other denizens in the city. Occasionally Groon or a Silver Tusk will 
wander through the marketplace, claiming interesting items as a tax to the city government but 
the Field is such a chaotic environment that not even the Silver Tusks relish intruding upon it. 
Here is where black market deals are made without the prying eyes of Groon and his cohorts. 
The Field is also one of the few safe places in Skaar for foreigners, if they can even reach the 
cavern, which lies deep within the city’s core. Anything goes in this wild and rowdy place and pit 
fights arranged therein would be reviled in any civilised city.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

23

78.144.81.132

skaar religion

Religion plays a large role in the everyday life of the orcs within Skaar, permeating everything 
they do. They primarily worship the god Alodai, also known as the Nine-Fingered or the Maimed 
Lord due to a missing thumb on his left hand. He received this disfigurement at the hands of 
Kharkus, a demon lord that sought to challenge Alodai’s divinity in the distant past.

The tenets of Alodai force orcs to submit wholly to his will, which is most often interpreted 
for them by the shamans known as the Mended Ones, although it often takes a visit from the 
sect’s enforcers to impress the urgency of their god’s desires upon stubborn or non-religious orcs. 
Alodai also demands daily remembrance of the power he holds over his worshippers, which most 
often comes in the form of self-abuse. 

Aside from the two main shrines to Alodai in the city, several smaller ones can be found throughout. 
These shrines take the form of a wooden likeness of the god’s face nailed to a post in the ground 
whilst sticks and chains are placed next to the post. Worshippers use these implements to bludgeon 
themselves, their form of deference to the Maimed Lord. It is considered bad form to bludgeon 
another orc with these implements, no matter how religiously inspired the act may be. 

Although mandated a daily ritual, very few orcs actually practice this on a regular basis. This gave 
rise to the practice of using brute squads to ensure that the Maimed Lord was getting his due. These 
squads of burly orcs travel out into the city on one day each week, thumping orcs who pass by a 
shrine without stopping to worship. On the other days of the week, these squads collect tithes for 
the church. While they do not often resort to physical violence, the menacing image of these orcs 
with their thick red robes and large clubs is sometimes not enough to inspire the believers.

The orcs of Skaar believe the city was given to them by the Nine-Fingered as a gift for heeding 
his prophecies and abiding by his will. More importantly, they believe it was he that nearly took 
it from them due to their complacency during the great storm that swept across the Hearth Plain 
many years ago. They still refer to that storm as the Fury of the Maimed Lord and they live in 
fear that every dark cloud forming on the horizon is once again a sign of his displeasure.

Religious Practices

The  self-administered  floggings  of  Alodai’s  faithful  are  by  far  the  most  common  of  religious 
practices  in  the  city. This  duty  is  usually  fulfilled  at  one  of  the  small  shrines  around  Skaar, 
although few do so regularly. This practice is not meant to harm the Nine-Fingered’s followers 
and even when they must be administered by his brute squads are in no way fatal or even harmful 
beyond a few bruises and some pain.

24

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

The Legend of Alodai and Kharkus
Kharkus the demon lord rules an abyssal lair whose very air inflicts pain and suffering on those 
exposed to it. The air whips and cuts the skin as clouds of sulphurous dust coat the eyes and throat. 
A millennia ago, Kharkus hatched a plan that would expand his dominion beyond this realm. 

The orcish god of suffering, Alodai, was to manifest himself on the material plane for a brief 
moment in order to power a great orcish war machine that would lead his followers to victory. 
During  this  moment,  Kharkus  would  strike  at  the  god,  who  would  be  weakened  by  this 
manifestation. Kharkus intended to destroy the god and rise to divinity, claiming the dead god’s 
realm as his own.

A moment can be an eternity even for those as powerful as Kharkus and Alodai, and it was more 
than enough time to wage a battle between the divine being and his would-be usurper. Kharkus 
shifted into the material world at the exact moment of Alodai’s arrival and forced them both into 
a field where no time ran. Alodai, enraged by this interruption, drew his mighty spiked club and 
attacked the demon lord. Kharkus countered with his two bladed whips, inflicting great wounds 
upon the god. One of his strikes severed the thumb from Alodai’s left hand, a wound that lingers 
to this day and gives Alodai one of his most fearsome titles, the Maimed Lord.

In the end, Alodai defeated the demon lord and drove him back to the Abyss. As punishment for his 
transgression, the god locked Kharkus’ plane in a state of timelessness, creating a barrier that could 
not be crossed through either side. Kharkus was forced to work indirectly to further his fiendish 
agenda and in retaliation he sent an ally to help the orcs who founded the Cult of Kharkus. 

Alodai has held the upper hand in this epic struggle for nearly 1,000 years but the pendulum 
is beginning to swing back toward Kharkus. His cult has grown far beyond expectations and 
the barrier erected by Alodai is beginning to weaken, allowing limited movement between the 
planes. All signs and portents point toward another epic conflagration between the two powers 
and some worry their struggle may spill out onto the material world where terrible destruction 
would be wrought.

Alodai’s  faithful  are  not  under  strict  duty  to  follow  any  other  rituals,  although  many  have 
personalised their worship of the Maimed Lord with a variety of small tributes or sacrifices. Some 
give money to the church above and beyond that claimed by the brute squads, whilst others wear 
symbols of the god at all times. There are two common symbols worn by the faithful. The first is a 
circular wooden medallion carved to resemble their god’s face, similar to those found at the shrines. 
The second is a cape or robe in the same rust colour as the robes worn by the faith’s enforcers.

The shrine of Alodai on the surface is called the Shrine of Circles, a pattern of circles beaten 
into the grass of the Hearth Plain. According to doctrine, the Maimed Lord watches each circle 
and looks favourably upon those within. Acolytes and priests of the orc god walk between the 
circles, administering a righteous thump to the faithful who prostrate within. The priests follow 
this with the phrase ‘Alodai thanks you’, and then move on to the next circle. Staying in a circle 
too long elicits suspicion from the priests; either the orc has done something terribly wrong or 
he enjoys the thumping a little too much.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

25

78.144.81.132

Alodai: The Maimed Lord, The Nine-Fingered
Alodai is the chaotic evil orcish god of pain and suffering. He exhorts his followers to commit 
acts of cruelty upon one another and themselves, demanding pain is felt in order to understand 
what he protects them from. Human theologians have posited that the god merely feels sorry 
for himself and that he wishes the pain of his lost finger on each and every follower. Alodai also 
demands  his  worshippers  spread  pain,  death  and  destruction  on  all  those  around  them.  He 
drives them constantly into battle and relishes the large hordes spreading his gift to the peoples 
of other races and nations. Alodai is often associated with chaos, destruction, evil and strength. 
His favoured weapon is a spiked greatclub.

The  other  major  shrine,  found  beneath  the  city’s  surface,  is  known  as  Blue  Falls  Rock. This 
natural stone formation has a unique combination of minerals that cause it to glow blue when 
exposed to light. It has the appearance of molasses flowing down the walls of the cavern but the 
smooth flow is every bit as strong as the surrounding walls. The blue stone has an unexplained 
effect on creatures using Night Sight, acting like a bright light would to a creature using normal 
vision  –  any  viewing  the  wall  using  Night  Sight  is  temporarily  blinded. This  property  fades 
immediately if the stone is removed from the wall and the wall itself radiates no magic at all.

Patterns have been painted on the walls using tree sap, which is hard to detect with normal sight 
(Perception –10%) but blocks the blinding effect of the wall on creatures using Night Sight. These 
patterns are transcribed from ancient orc writings that detail the form of Alodai. Worshippers stare 
at the wall and then close their eyes, where the shapes and patterns invert to become bright images 
in the orc’s mind. They believe that by taking the image of their god into their minds, they allow 
the deity to feel a wholeness of body that his maimed form does not allow.

Religious Organisations
The Church of Alodai
Priests and laymen devoted to Alodai walk the caverns and streets of Skaar in great numbers, 
performing both the spiritual and mundane tasks of the church. The church is led by a group of 
shamans known as the Mended Ones and it is they who determine official doctrine and lead the 
orcs in crowded group services on holy days. 

The  Mended  Ones  are  a  mysterious  group  that  wear  black  masks  when  they  move  about  in 
public. These masks are identical in appearance, so individual Mended Ones cannot be identified 
by observers. They live in a wooden building built against the rising cliff face of the mountain, 
just to the west of the Shrine of Circles. It is said that when the fires die out on holy celebrations 
and orcs lie drunk and gorged in the streets and alleys of the Hearth Plain, the Mended Ones 
walk through the celebration claiming the service of orcs who catch their eye.

26

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Church Rituals and Holidays
Most of the orcs in Skaar claim allegiance to the church of Alodai, even if many are not truly faithful. 
Almost every orc in the horde is a faithful servant of Alodai since the time of the great storm and the 
inattentiveness of the orcs in Skaar often contributes to conflicts with homebound horde orcs.

The church has five holy days each year, one to mark the passing of each season and one to 
celebrate the defeat of Kharkus.

The Yawning Sun: This ritual is performed to celebrate the lifting of winter and is the only time 
any kindness is shown within the city. The church invites all citizens to come together and feast 
in celebration of the beginning of spring. They set up tables of food at various locations within 
the city and watch long lines form as the citizens come to claim their free meal.

The  Burning Thirst:  In  the  middle  of  summer  the  church  mandates  that  its  followers  drink 
nothing but hot water for an entire week. This causes many orcs to become sick and die but the 
ritual continues to be followed without regard for their suffering. The horde is exempt from this 
ritual but many of them are so devout they still follow it.

The Broken Back: As autumn descends on the Hearth Plain, the church demands its followers 
give a tribute of gold and either wood or peat to the church. This has a dual function, allowing 
the church to garner a great deal of raw currency and also ensures the city stores are filled with 
fuel for the winter ahead.

The Maimed Lord’s Triumph: On the first day of winter the church celebrates the victory of Alodai 
over the demon lord Kharkus. Followers are supposed to spend the day in supplication to their lord and 
any found roaming the streets by vigilantes of the church are beaten in the Maimed Lord’s name.

The Frigid Belly: Helping to conserve the always strained resources of the city, the followers of 
Alodai fast at the midpoint of winter. This is the least followed ritual of the five holy days as it is 
difficult to keep an orc’s stomach from dictating his actions.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

27

78.144.81.132

Orcs singled out in this manner are bound to serve the church in a variety of capacities. They are 
used to gather food, deliver messages and do the mundane, laborious work of the church. The 
length of engagement is at the pleasure of the Mended Ones but rarely lasts less than a year. Those 
who refuse this service are judged infidels, branded with the symbol of Alodai on their cheeks and 
sent out into the city. Orcs branded in this way rarely survive a day in Skaar, as thugs and thieves 
descend upon them using their heresy as an excuse to slay them for their belongings.

However, service to the church of Alodai is a good lot for an orc in Skaar and most recognise it 
as such. They are well fed and clothed, even given a special tabard to wear that identifies them as 
wards of the church. This grants them access to areas otherwise deemed off limits to the common 
orc and affords a basic level of respect not shown to any other. The orcs are not paid for their 
service but are granted access to equipment and goods of a higher quality than is generally found 
elsewhere in the city. While they may not keep any such things after their service is complete, the 
orcs are free to use these items as they please during the time of their service.

The leader of the Mended Ones is a mysterious orc whose influence in the city grew after a 
successful run with the horde almost 20 years ago. When he returned from the campaign he 
called a group of Alodai’s servants together. They retreated for several days into the structure that 
would become their home and when they emerged they wore the black masks that have become 
their trademark. From that day they expanded the church’s influence in Skaar, to the point where 
the Mended Ones’ word carries almost as much weight as that of Grogan Thral and even Cylus 
Groon. Groon and Thral both have good relations with the priests and the Mended Ones often 
hire muscle and purchase information from the two rivals.

Cult of Kharkus
This dangerous cult has existed in orc culture for some time and they have a large presence within 
Skaar, boasting just over 700 members in or around the city. The size of the city allows them to hide 
their activities whilst accommodating the strange and unusual rituals they are bound to perform.

Recruits are subjected to a day long ritual before given full status as a member of the cult and 
many fail to survive the initiation. The initiate is first blindfolded and brought into the cult’s 
private caves, where he is given a mark on the right hand that burns through the entire ritual. He 
is then forced to perform heavy labour for several hours whilst cult members yell and scream at 
him. This serves to dull the mind of the initiate and implant suggestions into his subconscious 
mind. Finally, when he is exhausted from the day’s assault, he is taken into the cult’s summoning 
chamber to face his final test – confronting a demon. 

The cult has used the same demon for nearly a year now, being forced to find a replacement after 
the last broke free of its bonds and rampaged through the cult compound. They wooed this new 
demon with the blood of 30 orc and goblin captives, and pay it regular tribute in the form of 
gems, gold or further sacrifices. 

Cult members bring captives into the summoning chamber and call the demon. The mark the 
initiate  was  given  at  the  beginning  of  the  initiation  allows  the  demon  to  affect  him  without 
breaking its bonds. At this point they leave the demon and initiate alone, entering the room an 
hour later to find either a new member or a dead body, depending on the whim of the demon 
and the strength of the initiate. Once the initiation is over, the orc becomes a full member and 
spends the next few days learning the ways of the cult.

The fundamental belief of this cult is that Alodai did not survive his confrontation with the demon 
lord Kharkus. Rather, Kharkus killed the god during their battle and now inhabits his body, ruling 
both his own minions and those of the dead god. The fact that their priests are unable to cast spells 

28

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

does little to deter them. Kharkus, in their minds, does not grant spells to the true followers so the 
foolish masses continue their worship of Alodai, thus feeding the demon lord yet more power. It 
should be noted that the Cult of Kharkus does not seek to undermine the Alodaisian faith. In fact, 
the most zealous proponents among Alodai’s faithful may belong to the cult. Their god benefits 
from a growth in Alodai’s worship, so they work toward that end with a fervour equal to that of the 
Mended Ones themselves. They believe that those who are worthy will be brought into the cult in 
their own time, so they actually spend very little time seeking recruits.

Those  that  do  undergo  the  initiation  rite  find  themselves  in  a  world  of  alliances,  nepotism  and 
corruption. They are showered with material goods immediately, seducing them all the more into the 
demon lord’s realm and suddenly find themselves paying discount prices in the market and gaining 
preferential treatment in taverns and inns. Such orcs may find an extra ration chip or two in their 
sack at the beginning of the month, or an extra gold piece in their pocket at the end. These small 
things alone are enough to ensure the loyalty and commitment of most new members within a city 
like Skaar. Beyond that, members are granted access to the best jobs in the city. Proven members can 
find themselves in positions of authority within the standing guard and every place in the city feels the 
influence of the Cult of Kharkus, although many times orcs have no knowledge of such a connection. 
Even the Silver Tusks are not free from its influence for at least two of their number swear allegiance to 
the demon lord. Cylus Groon does not deal with the cult himself and collectively they are perhaps his 
biggest rivals for economic domination of the city. If he knew members of his own gang were affiliated 
with the group the City Master would have them purged immediately.

The downside to affiliating with the Cult of Kharkus is harsh indeed. First, junior members 
are expected to act as the eyes and ears of the seniors. If a senior member demands a favour, 
those of lower standing must complete the task in a satisfactory and timely manner for the cult 
has frightening ways of dealing with those who shirk their responsibilities. Since its beliefs run 
contrary to those of the church of Alodai, the cult has been outlawed within Skaar. Indeed, there 
are few places an orc can openly wear the mark of Kharkus. If an orc were ever publicly revealed 
as a member of the cult, he would likely be beaten severely and delivered to the church of Alodai, 
who would instantly slay him. 

New Heroic Ability

Order of Kharkus
Prerequisites: POW 12; Lore (Kharkus) 50%; Must serve the demon Kharkus willingly and 
wholly.
Hero Points: 8
Duration: Permanent

The demon  worshipping  members of the cult of Kharkus hold special powers over demonic 
entities,  using  them  to  intimidate  enemies,  increase  personal  power  and  wealth,  and  spread 
influence to even greater levels. Each member is infused with a form of demonic energy upon 
joining the cult and the leaders of the cult can draw upon great amounts of this raw power. 
Consorting with demons is never without its risks, however, and as senior members of the order 
grow in power, so do they grow in attachment to the demonic forces that grant it.

You can gain 1d6-1 temporary POW by sacrificing any living creature through ritual, the effects 
of which vanish at the sunrise on the following day. Additionally, you may communicate with the 
demonic minions of Kharkus once per day, getting dark and sinister answers to your inquiries.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

29

78.144.81.132

The orc stood in the corner, sweating. He could feel the course robe rubbing the skin of his chest 
and arms. He was sure they were red and the sweat and grime that covered him would cause 
them to burn well into the next day… if he lived that long. The robe was golden and covered 
with strange symbols whose meaning he could not even guess.

‘All  things  ready?’  asked  the  orc  beside  him  to  another  who  was  busy  checking  the  circle  of 
powder on the floor of the room.

‘This is good circle, Kruk, the demon won’t even be able to breathe our way,’ said the other.

Grendl fought back the urge to shed his robes and flee from the cave before they could summon 
the nether beast. He knew, however, that if he fled he would never make it out alive. The cult 
members in the next cavern would kill him before they let him leave, secrecy being of the utmost 
importance. No, his path was chosen and now there would be no turning back. He had a better 
chance with the demon.

‘Listen, let’s get this one out of the way fast,’ said Kruk. ‘I’m hungry.’

‘Right, don’t rush me,’ said the other orc, whose name Grendl did not know.

The orc backed off the circle and pulled a leather pouch from his belt. He withdrew a handful 
of powder and began to chant. As his words began to crescendo he threw the powder over the 
circle, creating a glistening globe of force that flickered into and out of existence. Amber smoke 
started to rise from the ground within the circle and a creature appeared that looked like a purple 
wardog with an oversized mouth and two human arms.

‘That’s disgusting!’ said Kruk.

The other orc jumped in. ‘Demon! Bellow with rage, for you are now mine to command!’

‘Can we not just get this over with?’ said the demon in a lazy tone. ‘You know I have villages to 
burn. I am starting to think this was not worth the orcs you sacrificed to me.’

The orc looked startled but he recovered quickly. ‘That’s why we brought you these gems,’ he 
said as he held out a silver tray full of black gems. ‘We just got them today, bathed in blood as 
you like them.’

‘Hmmm… Where is the initiate then?’ asked the demon.

Disciples of the Asphibyiex
This strange cult was founded after the great storm hit Skaar, over two decades ago, and has been 
growing in influence over the last few years, now boasts around 400 members city-wide. The 
cult’s followers believe an ancient god rests at the bottom of Lake Craddush and it was he who 
caused the great storm, not the Maimed Lord. They also believe another storm is imminent and 
that one day soon their god will rise up and destroy those who live in his sacred caverns. It is their 
hope that Skaar will be delivered to those who were faithful, namely them.

30

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Lake Zombie
Lake zombies are the foul creations of the disciples of the Asphibyiex. Their only known location 
is under the black waters of Lake Craddush, in the caverns beneath the city of Skaar for the 
elemental god known as the Asphibyiex revealed the secret of their creation only to the orcs who 
worshipped him. Ever since, these orcs have created several dozen of the wretched undead who 
live beneath the surface of the lake, feeding on bodies dumped into the water by the disciples. 
These zombies are often called to the surface by the disciples to perform manual labour or to 
fight on behalf of the cult. Their existence is still a secret in Skaar and the disciples’ operatives 
within the Lake Guard help to safeguard this secret.

Lake zombies feed on the flesh of the living, as do other zombies, but their proximity to the 
elemental god whose secrets permitted their creation grants them several advantages. First, they 
act more swiftly than normal zombies, allowing them a full array of actions each round. Second, 
the water they absorb into their bodies makes them incredibly resistant to bludgeoning weapons 
of all kinds (these weapons inflict half damage). This water can also be used to distract their 
opponents in combat, thus making it easier for the zombie to drag his foe into a watery grave.

Lake Zombies are summoned and created using a corrupt version of the Resurrection spell upon 
a recently drowned victim that has a single grain of Lake Craddush’s sand placed in each eye. 
Otherwise, they are the same as the Zombie entry in Monsters of Legend.

Members of the cult also believe that becoming an undead creature will bring them closer to 
their god, allowing them to serve his needs more closely. For this reason, almost every priest 
of the Asphibyiex specialises in the necromantic arts. Members consider it a high honour to 
be chosen for this service and once a year the members hold a type of lottery for the privilege 
of being killed and then reborn as one of the undead. The cult’s leaders have always rigged the 
lottery, as none of them yet wish to test their faith with such finality. By sheer accident, although 
those in the cult’s higher echelons proclaim it to be a boon of their god, the cult discovered 
the process for creating a potent form of undead known as a lake zombie. These zombies are 
amphibious, requiring contact with water to fuel their undeath and are fearsome combatants 
both on land and underwater. The disciples have a large number of zombies hidden beneath 
the dark surface of Lake Craddush and call upon them whenever their is need of their services.

The  disciples  gather  monthly  to  offer  sacrifice  and  prayers  to  their  unknown  god.  They 
congregate  near  the  lake,  taking  care  to  avoid  the  inevitable  guards  who  patrol  the  area  and 
call into service a dozen or more zombies to protect them from the cavern’s numerous dangers. 
They have an elaborate ritual that involves pouring water from one cylindrical, bottomless jug to 
another without spilling a drop. The ritual takes incredible co-ordination and thus far has never 
been performed correctly. Still they strive toward that goal, for they believe it will be a sign of the 
impending appearance of their hidden god.

The necessity and utility of having members within the regular guard posted to Lake Craddush 
is obvious and insinuating its members into the guard has been the cult’s greatest success. Several 
members of the lake guard are affiliated with the cult, whether through initiation or simple business 
dealings. Cult members arrange for monthly meetings to take place outside the view of other orcs 
and ensure the stock of zombies is never discovered. Two members of the lake guard unknowingly 
aid the disciples by smuggling ration chips to cult members disguised as black market traders. The 
disciples then sell the ration chips on the black market, helping to fund the cult.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

31

78.144.81.132

The Asphibyiex

The Asphibyiex is a malicious water elemental god, originating from the elemental plane of water, 
trapped in the material world by a consortium of powerful spellcasters who were bent on closing an 
elemental rift near their home. He is a minor deity of water elementals and is worshipped by certain 
communities of merfolk and other aquatic creatures. It is unknown how he acquired dominion 
over water-borne undead but leads his followers down the necromantic path at every opportunity. 
The Asphibyiex is associated with death, destruction, evil and of course… water. The favoured 
weapon of his acolytes is the trident, although many of his priests also focus on grappling and close 
quarters attacks to force their opponents into water where the priest has a distinct advantage.

New Heroic Ability
Disciple of the Asphibyiex
Prerequisites: POW 12; Lore (Asphibyiex) 50%; Must have drank the befouled water of Lake 
Craddush.
Hero Points: 8 or 12
Duration: Permanent

The leaders of this strange cult within Skaar practice the dark arts of necromancy in conjunction 
with their worship of the water elemental god, the Asphibyiex. They are able to create the undead 
terrors known as lake zombies and their charismatic lectures are persuasive enough to convince 
orcs to sacrifice themselves to a god they have never known. Although the group is not large 
by any means, its members are loyal and very well placed within Skaar society. More powerful 
members retreat to their secret cavern in order to prepare for the return of the Asphibyiex.

You have an additional 5 Magic Points to spend on spells based on or affecting the undead. 
Additionally, if 8 Hero Points were spent to purchase this ability, you gain the ability to command 
zombies with a –10% Influence Skill Test. If 12 Hero Points were spent to purchase this ability, 
you  gain  all  of  the  aforementioned  benefits  and  will  rise  automatically  as  a  Lake  Craddush 
Zombie to serve the cult eternally.

There are no prominent citizens or great leaders within the cult and this is one likely reason for 
its lack of widespread appeal. Another is the general insanity of the cult’s beliefs. Surprisingly, 
however, the cult is not too far off the mark in its doctrine. Although it is not an ancient god 
that dwells at the bottom of the lake, a lesser water elemental deity named the Asphibyiex does 
in fact reside there. Lake Craddush was formed when a powerful spell sealed an open portal to 
the watery hell where the god resided, trapping the Asphibyiex in the material world and he has 
dwelled here ever since.

32

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Akrilla the Witch
Akrilla was the High Shaman of Skaar for over a decade before she fell into disfavour during the great 
storm that destroyed much of the city. Her rise to power had been quick, during the days when the 
Mended Ones and the church of Alodai were the official religious leaders of Skaar. In those days they 
were not masked and walked freely about the city. Although many in the city did not trust her, Akrilla 
held the respect and awe of many of the Mended Ones due to her skills in divination and potion 
making. So, on the day of the Yawning Sun, they unanimously proclaimed her High Shaman.

During her tenure as High Shaman, Akrilla was a recluse from the city, only leaving her sheltered 
home to attend meetings of the church leaders and to oversee the celebrations on Alodai’s holy 
days. Rumours abounded that she consorted with devils and many claimed she was in league 
with the Cult of Kharkus. Nothing could have been further from the truth, however, as Akrilla 
dedicated herself solely to the church of Alodai and the orcs of Skaar, even enduring untold 
suffering to complete the rituals that made her divinations so powerful. All of this took place 
away from the eyes of other orcs and their suspicion led to Akrilla’s downfall after the mighty 
storm known as the Fury of the Maimed Lord.

During the weeks leading up to the Fury, Akrilla repeatedly tried to warn the city’s leaders about 
the coming punishment. She would emerge from her abode, her skin drenched with sweat and 
caked with the blood of animals, screaming the contents of her visions to sceptical orcs. Despite 
her reputation, such claims were not easily believed by the other Mended Ones and she soon 
stopped emerging from her home completely. She spent the final days communing with Alodai 
and brewing potions that wracked her body with intense pain. In a final, desperate, act to ward 
off the coming storm, she held the thumb of her left hand over a candle until flesh and bone 
alike disintegrated. To her dismay, the clouds continued to build on the horizon. After the storm 
receded and much of the city lay in ruin, the berserk inhabitants of Skaar were in danger of 
finishing what the storm had begun. Their rage had no direction and thus it turned inward, 
causing the destruction of hundreds more orcs as well as many of the structures that had survived 
the storm. The warlords convened and decided they needed to redirect the energy of the orcs. 
What they needed was a common enemy. 

The Mended Ones, already searching for a means to rid themselves of the troublesome witch, 
provided the perfect solution. They informed the warlords of her predictions and that she had 
cited the orcs’ recent laziness and pacifism as the reason for their god’s displeasure. They also 
spoke of her unusual behaviour of late and fears that she may very well have succumbed to some 
form of demonic possession. Of course few believed this but it mattered little to the warlords. 
The warlords saw a double victory in the offing. They could allay the rage of the orcs by providing 
a scapegoat with Akrilla and then could use her predictions as impetus to raise the greatest horde 
in living memory. This solution proved beneficial to both the Mended Ones and the warlords, 
and so the plan was enacted and Akrilla was forced to flee the city just to save her life.

Akrilla still lives deep in a swamp at the base of the Hearth Plain, continuing her study of divination 
and potion brewing.
 

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

33

78.144.81.132

defences

The horde that constantly roams the countryside searching for plunder and causing destruction is 
Skaar’s greatest defence.  Although most of the horde, and the warlords who control it, remain away 
from Skaar at all times, a small contingent always rests within the city. These orcs spend their time 
repairing war machines, recovering from wounds and helping the Skaar Guard defend the city. The 
most experienced and deadly warriors of the Skaar Guard usually graduate to the Lake Guard, a 
group that patrols and defends Lake Craddush from the deadly denizens of the caverns below.

The Horde

Orcs love to rampage and destroy. So when Alodai expressed his displeasure at the laziness that 
had befallen the orcs of Skaar, a horde of immense proportions was gathered. Each of the hordes 
that overran the city of Ironhallow Hall numbered nearly 3,000 berserk orc warriors. The new 
horde unleashed was larger than both combined, sending over 7,000 orcs on a blazing destructive 
path throughout the surrounding countryside.

The warlords who organised the horde decided amongst themselves that they alone would lead the 
orcs to glory. Their use of the witch, Akrilla, as a scapegoat for the destruction of the city also gave 
them an excuse to exclude other shamans from the leadership. This horde would go without shamans, 
who were tasked to help rebuild the city in an image more pleasing to the Maimed Lord.

In the intervening years, the shamans have grown in power and authority within the horde. The 
warlords, although jealous of the power of these orcs, do not discourage such growth for after the 
first such shaman rose to power and allied himself with one of their number, all warlords have 
struggled to see their own shaman win over the loyalty of the orcs they command. A warlord 
without a shaman in today’s horde is a weak and vulnerable target for an aggressive underling.

Factions
The horde is currently divided into several different factions, each with a powerful warlord as 
leader. Smaller factions exist but often ally with a larger faction out of necessity and survival. 
None of these smaller factions pose a great threat to the more powerful warlords and so they are 
permitted to exist as separate entities. A shaman supports each of the warlords and in return gains 
the respect and devotion of the warlord’s men. These influential leaders are often more scheming 
and  treacherous  than  their  martial  counterparts,  as  each  desires  to  gain  enough  influence  to 
become the High Shaman of Skaar, a post left empty since the exile of Akrilla. There is one 
unaffiliated shaman in the horde, Esteria, who has assembled a few dozen loyal orcs to guard and 
protect her and the minor warlords who do not maintain an allied shaman all court her favour, 
viewing the addition of a shaman as the next step toward legitimising their command. Esteria 
has not yet made a decision and most think she will not do so soon. None of the warlords has 
stepped up to prove his worth to the aspiring shaman and some believe the shaman aspires to 
become a warlord herself, a feat unheard of in orc society.

34

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

The various factions of the horde are detailed here.

Warlord: Aganir Thak.
Affiliated Shaman: Helag.
Number of Orcs in Command: 3,200.
Auxiliary Troops: 12 trolls, 150 goblins, 2 catapults, 2 pitch throwers and 1 attack sled.
Plots and Intrigues: Thak is the horde’s Warmaster and his troops are primarily veterans of 
previous actions. Although Bakka Grimlir commands a force of similar size, Thak’s troops are 
far superior and his allegiance with the troll clan who push his attack sled makes him a feared 
and respected leader.

Aganir Thak also commands the home force, although this is only a nominal position since he is 
rarely present in Skaar itself. His loyal servant, Grogan Thral, carries out his commands within 
the city. Thak does not share his faithful lieutenant’s hatred of Cylus Groon but is wary because 
of Groon’s connection to Grimlir, his main rival. At some point he may have to remove Grimlir 
in order to maintain the status quo within Skaar.

Warlord: Bakka Grimlir.
Affiliated Shaman: Ghaudrik.
Number of Orcs in Command: 2,400.
Auxiliary Troops: 40 goblins, 1 battering ram, 1 catapult and 1 pitch thrower.
Plots and Intrigues: Grimlir’s rise was a quick one and it caused much contention and jealousy 
in the lesser ranks of warlords as he was but a minor leader under the command of Agramm 
Schuul when he struck up a working relationship with Cylus Groon. His men would smuggle 
horde booty into the city and be paid handsomely by the fat City Master. Soon Groon recognised 
that having a powerful ally in the horde would be necessary for his own survival, particularly in 
light of the growing rivalry between he and Grogan Thral, whose patron was the arch warlord 
of the horde.

Grimlir  does  not  consider  himself  beholden  to  Groon  for  any  of  his  success  but  is  shrewd 
enough to recognise the benefits of their relationship. Unknown to the other warlords, Grimlir 
sometimes diverts his troops to some purpose Groon has given him. These excursions have made 
him quite rich but they are starting to cause friction with his shaman, Ghaudrik. It could be that 
soon Ghaudrik makes a move on Grimlir in a bid to lead the horde himself. No one knows what 
such disruption would mean for the horde overall, or whether or not other warlords will even 
allow such a large force to be commanded by a shaman.

Warlord: Korrang Val.
Affiliated Shaman: Drekken.
Number of Orcs in Command: 1,500.
Auxiliary Troops: 50 goblins and 1 battering ram.
Plots  and  Intrigues:  Korrang  Val  tries  to  keep  himself  and  his  troops  out  of  the  political 
intrigues of the warlords. He can often be found separated from the main body of the horde 
and is currently resting his troops within Skaar. Rumours abound that he has found some great 
resource but as yet has not told any of the other warlords what it might be.

Warlord: Agramm Schuul.
Affiliated Shaman: Sharrik.
Number of Orcs in Command: 420.
Auxiliary Troops: 160 goblins.
Plots and Intrigues: Schuul has the weakest personality of any of the warlords and most assume 
that his troops are actually controlled by the shaman Sharrik. In his laziness, Schuul has failed to 

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

35

78.144.81.132

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

notice his command becoming increasingly alienated from the rest of the horde. His troops were 
significantly diminished by the defection of Bakka Grimlir but still he sits inactive whilst Sharrik 
drives his troops on. Sharrik knows that the dispersal or defeat of Schuul’s troops would likely 
mean his death and he is desperately trying to hang on to what they have. He has taken note of 
the increased presence of messengers from both warmaster Thak and warlord Grimlir as this does 
not bode well for their survival, for both warlords seem to be sizing up Schuul’s commitment to 
his troops for a possible take-over.

Warlord: Cartag Reiga.
Affiliated Shaman: Krick.
Number of Orcs in Command: 260.
Auxiliary Troops: 60 goblins.
Plots  and  Intrigues:  Reiga’s  troops  were  nearly  decimated  after  an  unsuccessful  siege  several 
months ago. He spent nearly two months back in Skaar trying to raise more troops but a combined 
plot by Groon and Grimlir kept him from being successful. Grimlir is taking advantage of Reiga’s 
weakness by offering him a position with his troops but so far Reiga has held out, knowing full 
well the cruelty with which Grimlir treats his troops. If Reiga did not enjoy a special relationship 
with Warmaster Thak he would have already been assimilated into Grimlir’s command by force. 
Reiga is desperately searching for a way to dig himself out of his weakened position and is trying 
to forge an alliance with Korrang Val, who he knows is plotting for his own gain. So far Val 
has rebuffed these attempts but he may take the lesser warlord into his camp if it means subtly 
putting a roadblock in the way of Grimlir’s ambition.

Shaman: Esteria.
Number of Orcs in Command: 40.
Plots and Intrigues: Esteria is one of the most intriguing characters in the horde, being neither 
warlord nor affiliated with one. She trails the horde of Warmaster Thak, providing support whilst 
trying not to overstep into the duties of his shaman, Helag. Helag does not consider her a major 
threat, because she has no affiliated army and because she is female, and she has little interest of 
vying for his position. Esteria merely sees the advantage in being near the largest and most well 
commanded of the hordes and is biding her time for opportunity to arise elsewhere. Contrary 
to popular belief, Esteria has no desire to become a warlord herself, as she learned well from the 
example of Akrilla of what happens to a female shaman who oversteps their bounds.

On the Home Front

The warlords leave a regular presence in Skaar to perform a number of duties in support of the 
massive horde. This home force, under the watchful eye of the Hordemaster, helps to construct 
new  war  machines  for  use  in  besieging  towns  and  cities,  and  also  repairs  damaged  machines 
brought back to the city. Warlords who treat Hordemaster Rathak Kell with some measure of 
respect (and the only measure Kell truly cares about is in ounces of gold) get their machines 
and men tended to more quickly, thus keeping a stronger force in the field at all times. A bad 
relationship with the Hordemaster has been the downfall of many a warlord in the past.  

The group oversees the upkeep of the fences and ditches the orcs have built to protect their 
city from outside invasion. Most of these are built on the sloping edges of the Hearth Plain, 
effectively barring entry by any large invasion force. The heavy storms that regularly pound the 
city have an adverse effect on these defences and so require near constant attention. The warlord’s 
effort to keep these defences in high standard has paid off for Skaar, which has never had to repel 
an invasion from the outside.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

37

78.144.81.132

Cylus Groon often hires idle orcs from the Hordemaster’s stable to work his foundries. Skilled 
orcs also help the Ugreckt tribe forge weapons and armour for the city. This provides a chance 
for the orcs to intermingle with the citizens of Skaar. When they roam the city they are generally 
regarded  with  nervous  admiration  and  tend  to  take  what  they  want  from  the  city  without 
complaint. It also helps that Cylus Groon and Hordemaster Kell enjoy a friendly relationship, 
meaning that any indiscretions by the Hordemaster’s troops are likely to be overlooked.

The Loyal Guard
The other main body of defence for the city of Skaar is the Home Force, led by a cunning and 
loyal lieutenant of warlord Akanar, named Grogan Thral. 

This force roams the Hearth Plain, looking for trouble in Skaar and keeping tabs on the various 
agents  of  Thral’s  enemy,  Cylus  Groon.  Their  primary  responsibilities  include  keeping  track 
of who enters and leaves the city and monitoring the activities of any non-orcs within Skaar, 
whether residents or visitors. They tend to closely monitor the activities of the Ugreckt tribe 
in particular, as Thral distrusts the hobgoblin leaders. He believes their tribal loyalty and close 
relationship with Cylus Groon make them dangerous to the city and is currently investigating 
claims that the Ugreckt are hatching a plan to take over the city with the help of allies in the area. 

Defences
Orcs are well known for using siege engines in their quest to destroy that which they do not own. 
Some say their knowledge of such complex destructive machinery must come directly from their 
gods, since orcs are unable to master other engineering techniques considered rudimentary by 
the standards of other races. Dwarves contend that the secret to such weaponry was stolen from 
their god by an orc deity thousands of years ago.

How they came about this knowledge matters little to the victims of an orc siege. Defenders 
examine the weapons orcs bring, so that a proper response can be planned. Below is a study of 
the most common siege engines used by the orc horde within Skaar.

Battering Ram

Catapult, light and heavy

Pitch Thrower – The pitch thrower is a device resembling a trebuchet using a specially treated 
cloth to hurl flaming balls of pitch at the orcs’ enemies. These balls of pitch explode on contact 
with  any  surface,  showering  the  area  with  a  sticky,  burning  substance.  All  those  within  four 
metres of the impact point take 2d6 fire damage and must make an Athletics Skill Test at –10% 
or catch on fire. The rules for firing a pitch thrower are identical to those for aiming a catapult, 
requiring three crewmembers six melee rounds to load and aim the device. It takes a minimum 
of two crew to man the pitch thrower. Cost: 750 gp.

Attack Sled – This unique device is made for attacking walled fortifications such as fence lines 
and the walls of a castle or city. It takes the appearance of a 100 foot long covered sled on which 
up to 40 orcs may hide, granting them full cover from attacks. The machine is usually pushed 
by two lines of 10 large creatures, such as ogres or trolls, who are allied with the attacking army. 
These creatures line up on either end of the sled and are only given half cover from attacks. Trolls 
make excellent choices as they are hard to bring down with normal missile fire and are strong 
enough to push the sleds for over a mile over rough ground without resting. Cost: 450 gp.

38

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

This, of course, often brings the guard into direct conflict with Cylus Groon, who cultivates his 
relationships with the hobgoblins of the Ugreckt tribe as well as the trolls he employs. Groon has 
personally debunked Thral’s theory about the Ugreckt, although he privately has concerns that it 
may hold some measure of truth. For now, however, he is using his own resources to discover the 
veracity of the claim, whilst at the same time sabotaging Thral’s investigations. If such a plot were 
ever discovered it could mean the end to Groon’s reign, so he is most interested in uncovering 
it before anyone else. He could then use the plot to his advantage, executing the hobgoblins 
responsible and reinforcing his position as City Master.

Guard Patrols
Visitors to the city who take one of the two main roads into town will be met by a force of orcs 
and their business with the city demanded. If a satisfactory answer is not given immediately, or if 
the orc in charge is in a particularly foul mood, parties will be stripped of arms and marched to 
the outpost to meet with Thral or one of his underlings. The larger or more dangerous-looking 
the group, the more likely this course of action will be taken. Resistance to this procedure is met 
with force of arms with one of the orcs blowing a large horn to alert Skaar entire to the danger 
whilst the others attempt to slay the attackers.

A typical orc patrol will be made up of seven city guardsmen and one lieutenant. The lieutenant 
will tend to do all the talking whilst the others mill about with axes drawn. One of the guard orcs 
will hold a ram’s horn, which he will blow to alert the city of trouble in case of imminent battle.

Grogan Thral’s men also man the cliff forts that were built by the orcs to survey the surrounding 
land for signs of an invading army. Four such forts sprout from the cliffside that surveys the 
valleys below the Hearth Plain, built in the last several years as the main body of the horde ranged 
further and further from Skaar. Advance warning of any large-scale invasion became a necessity 
since it would likely take the horde up to a fortnight to receive any message to return home and 
another to make it back to the city.

A giant eagle colony rests atop the cliff face, several hundred feet above the highest fort. These eagles 
enjoy fun at the expense of the orcs stationed in the cliff forts – specifically, they love to dive down 
and snatch equipment off the fort’s walls, sometimes even snatching the helmet off an unsuspecting 
orc’s head. Although the orcs often lose valuable equipment in this way, including several spyglasses, 
they have yet to find a way to scale the cliffs and drive off the intelligent birds. It is only considered 
a minor nuisance, however, and no formal plan to eradicate the eagles has been enacted.

Skaar’s Spellcasters
Over the decades of the orcs’ domination of Skaar, orcish spellcasters have developed a number 
of unique and powerful spells to aid them in the defence of Skaar, as well as bolster the fighting 
effectiveness of the horde when they are forced to march alongside warriors to battle. Adepts, 
shamans, wizards and sorcerers of all types within Skaar may be found unleashing such spells at 
their enemies.

The following list of spells from the Legend Core Rulebook are exactly the types used by Skaar 
Spellcasters.

Common Magic – Bestial Enhancement, Fanaticism, Strength
Divine Magic – Berserk, True (Weapon)
Sorcery – Damage Enhancement, Regenerate, Wrack

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

39

78.144.81.132

Grogan Thral
The leader of the Home Force is both charismatic and cunning, relying on his warrior’s instincts 
to protect the interests of his patron whilst throwing obstacles in the path of Cylus Groon. He 
plays a very active role in the city, contrary to his rival, but like Groon he employs a number 
of  underlings  and  henchmen  to  carry  out  the  day-to-day  activities  necessary  to  maintain  his 
authority in Skaar.  

He  is  beginning  to  fear  the  sheer  size  of  his  command  structure  is  weakening  his  position, 
however, and is reluctant to spread forces too thin lest he lose control. He is secretly planning a 
purge that he hopes to combine with a blow to Groon’s organisation, thus ridding himself of two 
problems in one stroke. The plan is perhaps far too ambitious for any orc to succeed in but thus 
far is progressing as envisioned.

Ultimately, Thral would like to become City Master himself. With the might of the greatest 
orcish warlord behind him, he believes the various factions and alliances in Skaar can indeed be 
unified. What he requires is an enemy, one that threatens the city’s very existence. That enemy, 
he believes, is the hobgoblin tribe. Thral’s agents have been working with the tribal chieftain of 
the hobgoblins under the guise of orc merchants to establish trade with the other hobgoblins in 
the area. This has been done clandestinely, even avoiding the prying eyes of Cylus Groon and his 
cohorts. When the time comes, Thral’s agents intend to set up a large shipment of weapons and 
armour that will subsequently be discovered by the city guard. Evidence found incriminating 
Cylus Groon in a plot to take total control of the city will enable Thral’s forces to ride in and 
save the day against a surprised and off-guard Groon. Until this plan comes to fruition, however, 
Grogan is content collecting information via his plants in Groon’s organisation and supervising 
the defence of the city he feels destined to rule.

The Lake Guard
This group of orcs, led by an insane overlord named Grezius Bosh, defend the cavern complex 
surrounding Lake Craddush. Bosh is technically under the auspices of Grogan Thral but the 
difficulty of dealing with the insane orc and Thral’s own machinations on the surface have slowly 
eroded  their  relationship  to  the  point  where Thral  now  leaves  the  mad  orc  to  his  task,  only 
getting involved when disputes or emergencies arise.

The guard roster fluctuates between 150 and 200 orcs at any one time and is always manned 
by experienced warriors. Three shamans also appear in the ranks of the Lake Guard, which is a 
departure from the normal practice of excluding shamans from participating in the guard. In 
addition, several members of the cult of the Asphibyiex have made their way into the Lake Guard 
to help further their own goals. The dangers of the undercity are numerous and ever present, 
and the Lake Guard is a duty that brings both large rewards and great danger. Aside from the 
usual subterranean dangers such as umber hulks, darkmantles and troglodytes, the Lake Guard 
battles the constant attempts of the nearby dwarves to poison the water supply and sabotage the 
orcish city. The orcs have become intimately familiar with their foes over the past 100 years and 
consider the ongoing battle a matter of pride.

Lake Guard patrols consist of five orcs, one leader and four warriors, all trained to work and 
fight underground. They monitor the caverns constantly and summon others when they note a 
suspicious trail or item. Aware their darkvision is not the advantage down here that it is on the 
surface, the Lake Guard carry numerous light sources in the hope the cave dwelling creatures 
they encounter will be more irritated by it than they.

40

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

The other function of the Lake Guard is to ration the city’s water, guarding the stock of ration 
chips and seeing they are distributed in a manner consistent with the wishes of Cylus Groon. 
These chips are a valuable resource and another reason the Lake Guard is manned with reliable 
and experienced orcs. The Lake Guard also man the booths where ration chips are collected and 
exchanged, often hiring outside mercenaries or off duty orcs from Hordemaster Kell to transport 
and defend both water and chips. That said, the black market for these commodities is large in 
the city and more than one orc in the guard has been known to participate for his own gain. The 
punishment for being caught in such endeavours is execution on the spot, so such activities are 
usually limited and hidden. The disciples of the Asphyibyiex have actually convinced Bosh that 
drowning is an appropriate punishment for such a crime and they happily collect the bodies of 
such victims to use in their rituals.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

41

78.144.81.132

tour of the city

Skaar is a large city housing over 25,000 orcs. Split into two halves, many spend their entire 
lives on the Hearth Plain, scratching out an existence whilst trying to avoid the attentions of 
the  various  factions  vying  for  total  control  of  Skaar. The  majority,  however  exist  within  the 
mountain, within the old caverns of Ironhallow Hall, the original dwarven settlement. Although 
poverty, strife and death is never far away for the weak and helpless, those that manage to move 
to the undercity tend to have a far higher life expectancy than those exposed to the elements 
outside the great stone archway.

Government House

This  building  was  once  the  centre  of  trade  in  the  Ironhallow  settlement.  It  was  built  by  the 
dwarves of Ironhallow as a place to meet and respect those of other races and cultures, all the 
while engaging in the trade that had become the lifeblood of the settlement. As such, it features 
a variety of architectural influences meant to make other races feel at home during their stay on 
the Hearth Plain. It is the only building in the city to use imported white marble as a building 
material and this sturdy stone was one of the reasons the building was spared during both the 
initial orc invasion and the great storm 75 years later. 

The dwarves built the structure on an artificial hillock in order to allow for three-dimensional 
architectural  design,  as  well  as  to  create  areas  that  would  feel  comfortable  to  the  occasional 
halfling  contingent  of  traders  and  explorers.  One  of  the  hillsides  is  flat  and  a  pipe  that  runs 
through the hill funnels water caught in storm drains into a waterfall, which splashes into an 
intricately carved basin at the hill’s bottom. Here travellers of all races took their lunches in the 
open air, viewing the underground atrium through an enormous glass wall built directly into 
the hillside. Without the purifying spells of the dwarven clerics, however, this pool has become 
tainted and stagnant, only cleaning itself after a long rain. Garbage and muck fills the bottom of 
the basin and a group of goblins that works for Cylus Groon has claimed the area as their own.

The once grand doors to the establishment were destroyed during the siege and have since been 
rebuilt with wooden replacements that do not quite reach the top of the frame. The doors lead 
into the entry hall, which was once a grand, vaulted room but now lies in a state of semi-ruin. 
Members of the Silver Tusks can be found here lounging at all times of the day and the place 
stinks of faeces and rotting fish due to an old fountain now used as a latrine and garbage bin. All 
of the interior doorways have been cleared and the side rooms are filled with heaps of junk. Food, 
beer and other daily requirements are also stored in the rooms and a fire pit has been arranged in 
one of the rooms to cook the fresh meat Groon’s minions bring each day.

The building contains several underground rooms, built into the artificial hillock and even deeper 
into the earth. This is where Groon spends many of his waking hours, plotting and managing 
to add to his riches and power. The deepest rooms are his private sanctum, guarded by layers of 
traps and loyal minions, while the middle rooms near the surface hold much of his accumulated 

42

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

wealth and the living quarters of his most trusted allies. Breaching this area would be a fantastically 
difficult task and since the time of the dwarves these chambers have remained inviolate. 

There are rumours of hidden caches of gold and gems located throughout the hillock that would 
have been used by the merchants of Ironhallow Hall but none have ever been found and Groon 
continually denies their existence to keep thieves and opportunists from constantly ransacking 
the place. Although few, if any, of these thieves would be able to bypass Cylus’s defences, it is a 
headache that he does not wish to add to his list.

Temple of Alodai

The temple of Alodai is one of the few structures in the city that was not rebuilt or converted 
from the time of the dwarves. It dates back only 20 years to the time just after the great storm 
that ravaged the city. At that time the shaman Akrilla was the leader of the Mended Ones and her 
expulsion from the city and subsequent disgrace brought suspicion onto the remaining leaders 
of the faith. 

They lived with this distrust for several years and many of their number were killed by fearful 
and  superstitious  orcs.  Then  came  Grum  Preddor,  a  powerful  and  influential  shaman  who 
distinguished himself on the field of battle whilst travelling with the First Horde. Preddor came 
to the Mended Ones and called them into a retreat for prayer and reflection. When they emerged 
from the small, wooden church building near the Shrine of Circles they seemed to resonate with 
focus and direction. The church leaders were all wearing black masks and they proclaimed from 
that day forth their identities would remain secret.

Their  first  action  after  this  new  revelation  was  to  commission  the  construction  of  a  new 
headquarters, one that could house them in secrecy and allow them to conduct church business 
without distraction. A hundred orcs and goblins worked night and day to complete the structure, 
which can still be seen on the spot of the old church building, some 50 yards from the site of 
the Shrine of Circles.

The  building  is  made  completely  of  native  orangewood  and  it  stands  out  against  the  harsh 
grey  cliff  face  that  reaches  skyward  from  the  Hearth  Plain.  The  outside  of  the  structure  is 
architecturally complex, with many small rooftops, landings and balconies placed throughout. 
It appears awkward to outside observers and perfectly reflects the chaotic nature of those who 
built it and those who live within. The Mended Ones can often be seen overlooking the Hearth 
Plain from these various perches, their draping robes and dark masks presenting a grim site to 
those who tarry to watch.

The inside of the structure is far less chaotic than the outer shell, housing several large rooms 
on the first floor and living quarters on the second and above. The top floor is one large room, 
a private  worship area  for the Mended Ones to commune with Alodai and learn  his wishes. 
Screams of agony can often be heard echoing across the plain from this private shrine as the high 
priests of Alodai submit themselves, and others, to painful and agonising rituals.

The living quarters on the second floor are more conventional, with each room being equally 
furnished with a bed, chest, desk and chair. These rooms also have openings to the balconies and 
landings visible from the exterior. These open doorways are often decorated with strings of beads 
or painted animal skin. The balconies and landings are often higher than the rooms themselves 
and are accessible by stairs that hug the building’s outer walls. Although the Mended Ones have 
servants that attend to their needs, they are never seen on these balconies, which are considered 
the private areas of the individual priests and off limits to all uninvited trespassers.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

43

78.144.81.132

The bottom floor is divided into three large rooms, each having several closets, cubby-holes and 
storage bins built into the walls. The first is the temple of Alodai itself and this covers nearly the 
entire front half of the building. It is the only place in the structure where all orcs are permitted and 
also the only room in which there are windows to the outside. The room is covered by blood soaked 
rugs, most made from the skin of both surface and subterranean animals, and crude paintings 
depicting scenes from the doctrine of Alodai cover the walls of the room. Most of the paintings show 
great historical battles in which a shaman has played a decisive role or orcs submitting themselves 
to the rituals and trials demanded by their faith. One wall carved in bas-relief is devoted to the 
battle between Alodai and Kharkus. It depicts a victorious Alodai, his lifeblood draining from his 
wounded hand, standing over the beaten demon lord as he cringes in fear.

The faithful are expected to pay monetary tribute to Alodai for which they receive a righteous 
beating at the hands of one of the lesser priests. After enduring their worship, the faithful are 
granted  food  and  drink,  then  sent  on  their  way.  Most  orcs  in  Skaar  muster  the  strength  to 
worship here at least once each month, although the truly committed come here as often as they 
can. At least one Mended One along with several lesser priests, guards and servants tend to the 
faithful here at all times.

The second room, reached through a door to the right of the main altar, is a kitchen and pantry 
area where servants of the Maimed Lord prepare food for the faithful and priests. A large fire pit 
stands in the centre of the room and it is not unheard of for an unhappy priest to throw a servant 
in with the evening’s fare.

The third room on the bottom floor of the temple acts as quarters for the temple’s servants. It is 
not a happy retreat, because of a ghost that haunts the room. The apparition appears randomly, 
causing a chill in the room and causing flames in the room to either flare up or snuff out. So far 
the ghost has not harmed any of the servants but it does cause a lot of lost sleep. 

Market Cave

This large cavern stands as a lasting tribute to the artistic and engineering genius of the dwarves 
who built the original city. It was once a large amphitheatre where dwarven bards and storytellers 
would sing songs telling of their ancestors’ great deeds. The ridged half-dome behind the stage is 
carved completely from the rock of the cavern and the rest of the cave is decorated with statues 
depicting heroes of dwarven legend. Most of these statues have been vandalised over the last 100 
years, broken and covered with all manner of disgusting things. Two of the statues resisted this 
vandalism and eventually the orcs tired of trying to destroy them.

This stone-ridden cavern is where the orcs meet to trade and do all manner of business. There 
are only a few orcs here that make a living at trade and the majority of those make just enough 
to rent their space from Groon. These destitute traders usually sleep in the cavern when business 
is scarce and feed themselves by catching electrical cave rats, or flaggs. One orc, Garkyon, has 
managed to carve out a decent living merely by trading here in the market. His wooden stand 
deals mainly with tools and other items for everyday living but as with everything in Skaar his 
success has a hidden tale.

44

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Statue Properties
The two undefiled statues were warded against aging and damage with powerful dwarven magic. 
The orcs lack the magical knowledge to decipher the magic and so leave the statues intact in the 
marketplace as a reminder of who they conquered. There are rumours that these statues are the 
inert forms of legendary dwarven warriors who will reclaim the city when the time arrives. These 
stories are dismissed by the shamans of Skaar as idiotic fancy.

Flagg
These  diminutive  vermin  are  fleet  footed  annoyances  that  are  notoriously  curious  and  fearless. 
Flaggs would likely be considered to be cute to those who first see them; an opinion that rapidly 
changes as they begin to electrify whatever has their attention at the moment. The tiny magical 
rodents are stark white, with sparkling blue eyes that glow candescently from within. Their velvety 
white fur crackles with potential energy, arcing outward occasionally as a small spark or popping 
line. Flaggs might seem like any other subterranean rodent at first look but that illusion is cast aside 
as soon as they get agitated and tiny bolts of lightning begin to burn holes everywhere.

Everything is interesting to a flagg. They want to smell, touch and feel everything under their tiny 
little paws. This would be normal and less worrisome for any normal rodent but the electricity 
that a flagg generates is not always under its control. Metallic objects that get too near to a flagg 
gather minor shocks, which might bring about loud noises and aggression. Such responses are 
sure to work a flagg into a fearful frenzy of hurled bolts of lightning and frantic bites, neither of 
which will be beneficial toward calming the situation.

STR
CON
SIZ
DEX
INT
POW
CHA

Dice
1D3
2D6+1
1D2
6D6+10
4
4D6
4

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank
Weapons
Weapon
Bite
Shock

Skill
30%
95%

Average
2
8
1
31
4
15
4

5
+0
–
6m
+6

Damage
1D2–1D8
1D4 electricity

1D20
1–3
4–6
7–9
10–12
13–15
16–18
19–20

Hit Location
Right Hind Leg
Left Hind Leg
Hindquarters
Forequarters
Right Front Leg
Left Front Leg
Head

Typical Armour: None

Traits: Immune to Electricity

AP/HP
–/2
–/2
–/3
–/3
–/2
–/2
–/2

Skills:   Athletics 35%, Dodge 80%, Stealth 75%

Notes: Flaggs can only use their Shock attack once every other Combat Action. It ignores AP 
from metallic forms of protection and has a range of 2m.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

45

78.144.81.132

Garkyon is the cousin of Cylus Groon. Although such familial distinctions are all but meaningless 
in orc society, he was able to use Groon’s name where others would have been killed for doing so. 
He approached the Silver Tusks and offered to make their jobs a little easier in return for protection 
from the collections they made. He offered to be their eyes and ears in the caverns below, dealing 
information whilst selling goods to the orcs of Skaar. In order to protect Garkyon’s burgeoning 
business, the Silver Tusks declared the market to be off limits to bullies, thugs and thieves. This is 
the only area in the city with an official prohibition against such activities (for otherwise the Silver 
Tusks’ own activities would be quite inhibited). They visit the ruined cavern frequently and often 
employ work crews to transport goods to and from Garkyon’s subterranean shop. Other orcs are 
safer here from the predations of the Silver Tusks and other criminals than anywhere else in the 
city. This makes trade here brisk and orcs are not afraid to bring their hard earned or stolen gold. 
Sometimes orcs even barter their goods to the traders but doing so fetches abysmally low prices.

There are close to two dozen other vendors and dealers in the market, and new arrivals appear in place 
of failures on a regular basis. Visiting traders and merchants can rent floor space in the cavern by the 
day for a fee of three silver pieces, payable to any Silver Tusk or to Cylus Groon at Government House. 
Hunters will often bring extra game here to sell to those who are unable to catch their own and one 
of the regular traders sells nuts, roots and berries gathered from the surrounding wilderness. Inferior 
cloths can be found here, most of them obviously heavily used or stolen for sale at the market but 
orcs do not personally value silks and other fine materials beyond the price they can fetch in human 
markets. Any tools or adventuring gear found here is likely to be of inferior quality and stands a good 
chance of failing when used under less than optimal conditions.

The Choked Pit

There are a hundred small places within Skaar where orcs meet to drink and blow off aggression 
but  few  of  them  offer  the  service  of  the  Choked  Pit.  Built  into  an  old  barracks  house  near 
the entrance to the caverns, this tavern plays host to a variety of clients from both above and 
below ground. There is even a separate room where brave non-orc residents of Skaar can mingle 
without being mobbed by drunken orc warriors. The Choked Pit is a rough place but an orc can 
at least be assured of hot food and decent spirits. If an orc keeps his head down and his axe at the 
ready, he may just find a break from the ever-present violence of life in Skaar.

The owner and barkeep is an old orc named Gireous Phlog. Phlog is nasty and brutish, even by 
orc standards, and it is said that working for him is worse than being thrown into the work pits. 
Even so, he never has a shortage of females to carry drinks and cook food in his establishment. 
This is one of the few places in Skaar that a female is paid for her work and there is ample side 
business to be gleaned by accompanying more generous patrons home at the end of a shift. 

The establishment is open 24 hours a day and those who frequent it swear Phlog never stops 
manning the bar. In reality, he is only around about half the day but enjoys the reputation he 
has for working non-stop so he employs various tactics to maintain the illusion. The menu is the 
same day and night, although cooks can sometimes create something different depending on the 
availability of ingredients. The usual fare is a thick stew with meat whose origins are better left 
unknown. Orcs do not bake bread but will add grain directly to the stew when it is available. An 
orc that speaks to the cooks privately can even get special orders made, although asking Phlog 
himself is liable to get an orc thrown out of the establishment.

The Choked Pit serves all types of drinks as they are available. The horde’s raiding parties ensure 
a constant flow of ale and wine into the city and a good portion of it ends up in the private cellars 
of the Choked Pit. The tavern’s speciality, as one might expect, is grokk. They make their own 

46

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

special blend of grokk and its reputation is mostly responsible for the tavern’s present success. A 
mug costs a mere silver piece, making it one of the rare affordable luxuries in Skaar. Phlog has 
considered the idea of recruiting a Silver Tusk to run the business. The popularity of his tavern 
is going to force his hand soon, and there is competition amongst the Silver Tusks to see who 
will get the opportunity.

The Field

This is the largest single cavern in the complex beneath the Hearth Plain and its floor was cleared 
of stalagmites and debris in the time of Ironhallow Hall. The orcs use it much as the dwarves did, 
as a common area where sports and combat practice take place alongside casual meetings and 
secretive business dealings. Roaring crowds of orcs can be found at all times watching combat 
trials and pit fights, sometimes against dangerous creatures dragged from deep in the earth. This 
is not a place for infants or outsiders as it stands for the most dangerous and violent aspects of 
orcish culture and mindset.

The pit fights started almost immediately after the orcs invaded as a way for off duty soldiers to 
blow off steam and direct their unspent rage. It went this way for decades and the pit masters that 
arose to arrange fights for the appreciative crowds gained great wealth and prestige. One such 
pit master was a fat orc named Cylus Groon, whose exotic fights and reputation for pleasing the 
crowds soon vaulted him to the top of the scene. After the devastation of the Fury of the Maimed 
Lord, he used this popularity to help solidify his position as City Master.

Fighting away from the pit is common in the Field as well. Business dealings gone sour and poor 
sportsmanship are typical reasons for such violence, which can often turn as deadly as those in 
the pit. When such fights break out, crowds will often ring around them, looking for interesting 
side action away from the pits. The regular authorities in Skaar stay away from the Field and the 
unstated law is anything goes. If the fights get too big, however, a force of guards will be called in 
to prevent wholesale rioting and destruction. Orcs are rowdy and hot-blooded and neither Groon 
nor Thral wish to preside over a city full of enraged warriors. Any involved in such massive brawls 
is generally executed on the spot, although some survivors may be thrown onto a work crew.

In addition to the constant fighting, shady business dealings of all sorts take place across the 
Field. This is the centre of the black market in Skaar, if an orc knows where to look and who to 
ask. The black market here functions like that in any major city, although there is no one power 
in control of it and most of the groups in Skaar have an interest in these quiet dealings. 

The Cult of Kharkus sells its secrets and small portions of its power to entice new followers into 
the fold. They track potential recruits, sometimes for weeks, to gauge if they are likely to join the 

Pit Fights
The most common types of fights in these pits are one-on-one, one-on-many, chain gang, beasts and 
monsters, and total blood baths.
 
The  most  commonly  used  beasts  are  wolves  and  other  animals  from  their  surroundings  but 
occasionally the orcs find something more exotic such as a captured centaur. A particularly nasty 
match that is a true orc favourite places several gladiators in a wooden ring into which several 
sacks of ravenous rats are poured.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

47

78.144.81.132

cult or would report to Groon or Thral in hopes of a reward. When a potential mark is found, 
the cult sends an agent out to the Field in order to make contact. This usually involves some 
discussion of religion or philosophy, as well as an attempt to gauge the ambition of the orc in 
question. If the recruit is receptive to the initial overtures, more senior members of the cult will 
approach the orc on his next visit to the Field. They are fond of offering minor magic potions 
or small tokens charged with demonic power in exchange for a favour from the recruit. At this 
point the cult sits back and waits for the recruit to come back for more, knowing that when the 
orc returns they have hooked another initiate.

The orcs that worship the mysterious being known as the Asphibyiex also take advantage of 
the relative freedom of the Field. Here they trade for items needed to perform their grisly rites, 
paying primarily with the ration tokens they have acquired and looking for incense and a large 
quantity  of  black  onyx  gems  that  would  create  suspicion  if  they  were  acquired  openly. The 
disciples of the Asphibyiex also attempt to make contact with new followers in the Field but they 
use the lure of extra ration chips to recruit their followers. If they suspect one of their contacts is 
going to the authorities with information about the cult, they will track the orc until he is alone 
and kill him, taking the corpse to be sacrificed to their unknown god.

Even Groon and Thral utilise the field to perform operations and acquire goods in a manner that 
will not implicate them or their underlings. Groon usually sends a group of goblin servants into 
the Field to deliver or acquire messages and goods in order to avoid risking the lives of his more 
valued men and the goblins become convenient scapegoats should a mission run afoul. Groon 
has considered getting involved in the ample drug trade but thus far he has chosen to keep his 
hands clean. That said, several of the Silver Tusks are involved in distributing drugs they buy 
through handlers in the Field, simply not involving Groon in their business.

Thral’s men watch from a distance, only entering the Field in the case of an emergency. He is 
most interested in implicating the Silver Tusks or Groon’s goblin lackeys in illegal activities but, 
unfortunately, the orcs Thral has assigned to the Field are far from loyal to him. Instead, they are 
paid by most of the rival factions to conceal what they learn and the accumulated bribes are more 
than enough to guarantee silence. It is through these traitors that the disciples of the Asphibyiex 
managed to infiltrate the ranks of the Lake Guard, as enough gold and ration tokens can buy an 
orc’s way anywhere in Skaar if he knows who to bribe.

As dangerous as it is, the Field is where many of the orcs of Skaar come to relax when they are 
not scraping for survival. A variety of sports are played on the Field, including skrat, a game 
whose object is to kick a newly separated horse’s head into the opposing team’s goal. The game 
lasts until the horse’s head is literally torn apart by the rough treatment, at which time the goal 
with the most gore is declared the loser. Another popular game is agger, in which each orc takes a 
greatclub and smashes it against other combatants until only one orc is able to swing the club.

Artists’ Caves

This small cluster of caves is where some of the orcs of Skaar gather to play music, tell stories 
and engage in various other amusements. Most of Skaar’s citizens have little interest in engaging 
in such frivolous activities but more refined and civilised orcs do exist. They engage in artistic 
endeavours ranging from painting to music and the only real written records of life in Skaar can 
be found in the rucksacks and scroll tubes of a few of these orcs.

As one might expect, orcs that spend time in these caves are the object of ridicule and bullying 
by a majority of Skaar’s population. Because of this, the community of artists has become a close 
knit group, aiding one another and living a communal lifestyle within these caves. They return 

48

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

the derision they receive from other orcs in kind and would like nothing better than to be able to 
leave Skaar altogether. Unfortunately they realise that without the protection of the other orcs, 
they would most likely be killed in the wilderness simply for their race and appearance. Thus 
they remain in Skaar, losing themselves in their work in order to forget their daily trials.

These orcs brave the city at large in order to sell some of their handiwork, which is appreciated 
by many orcs in the city even if the creators are not. The irony of this is not lost on the artists 
but they endure what they must to make a living. Despite constant badgering these orcs do not 
hold ill feeling toward their race as a whole and would certainly not aid any outsider attempting 
to undermine or destroy the city. They might, however, sell their wares to such interested parties, 
possibly providing a good route to get inside help infiltrating the city, since the artists would aid 
in the smuggling of their pieces and would likely help an outsider secretly gain access to Skaar.

There is one popular cavern amongst these caves, called the musicians’ corner. Here one can find 
orcs playing drums and a variety of other percussion instruments for amusement and profit. The 
orcs almost exclusively play percussion instruments, as other types tend to be too delicate for the 
orcs to handle and stringed instruments, especially those requiring plucking such as harps and 
dulcimers, irritate orcs beyond reason. Music is the only art form taken seriously by the orcs, who 
love to dance and scream wildly to the beat of hollow shells and flagg-skin drums. Sometimes 
a storyteller will pair with a drummer, realising his art will never be taken seriously outside of a 
musical context. He rarely gains more respect, however, as none of the whooping and hollering 
orcs stop to pay attention to what is being said.

Ugreckt Tribal Grounds

The Ugreckt tribe sprung up around the initial group of hobgoblins Cylus Groon hired to help 
rebuild the city. Their main task was metalworking and defence, and to this end Groon ordered 
a large smithy built for them, around which they now live. The smithy and the tribe have both 
grown in the past 20 years and the hobgoblins now claim nearly the entire eastern edge of the 
Hearth Plain as their home. At the insistence of Grogan Thral their expansion has been curbed in 
the last few years and the tribal chieftain, a powerful hobgoblin warrior named Tallarak Vressun, 
keeps  tight  control  over  the  number  of  hobgoblins  living  on  the  plain.  Although  distrustful 
of both their numbers and race, Thral understands the defensive benefits of having the tribe 
situated where they are and he has not made a case for their dissolution. 

In addition to the fences and ditches surrounding the entire Hearth Plain, the Ugreckt chieftain 
has ordered  the  construction of several other defensive structures to aid the hobgoblin  tribe. 
The first of these is a log wall built using wood hauled up the mountain from the forest below. 
These three foot high walls are designed to slow an invading army while still allowing for the 
use of javelins and other ranged weapons against the tribe’s foes. The hobgoblins have also built 
several large ballistae to counter flying invaders and dissuade attackers from approaching the 
compound. A lookout tower rises above the rest of the hobgoblin encampment, from which 
the hobgoblins monitor the mountainside as well as the city of Skaar itself. They keep watch on 
movement outside the city and give such information to Cylus Groon, who is always interested 
in the extracurricular activities of Grogan Thral’s scouting units.

The hobgoblin tribe now numbers over 200 warriors, as well as 150 females and children, not 
enough to seriously challenge Skaar as a whole but enough to prevent them from being abused 
like the goblins of the city. Tallarak Vressun, is the only surviving member of the group that 
made the agreement with Cylus Groon 25 years ago and is a cunning hobgoblin who leverages 
his relationship with Groon to its fullest potential, granting him privileges of movement and 
protection not enjoyed by any other outsider. He often travels around the city with a powerful 

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

49

78.144.81.132

retinue of guards in order to buy goods, make business and other arrangements, as well as gather 
information.

Unbeknownst to either Groon or Thral, the hobgoblins have dug an escape tunnel leading from 
their compound to an unwatched portion of the mountain slopes. They have been using this 
route to secretly engage in talks with a large hobgoblin tribe living several miles from the city. 
The nature and outcome of these talks is unknown but is unlikely to be beneficial to the orcs. 
Thral  believes  the  hobgoblins  are  planning  something  but  he  cannot  be  sure  and  their  close 
relationship with Groon makes him cautious about confronting the chieftain.

Goblin Warrens

This area was where the bulk of the hordes rested after the first day of the invasion of Ironhallow 
Hall. It quickly became uninhabitable, a bowl-shaped depression full of waste and rot. When the 
orcs completed their conquest of the area, this portion of the Hearth Plain was vacated. It was 
used primarily as a dump and waste disposal area until the goblin population in the city started 
to exceed the land the orcs had given them. At that time all goblins of the city were forced to 
move into this area, which had abundant tunnels underneath small hills that dotted the area.

Since that time this area has become the goblins’ own, the trash and waste the orcs dumped here 
having been cleaned out for the most part, although the goblins add more of their own every 
day. Carrion beasts have been driven further into the Hearth Plain to feast on the discards of the 
multitude of orcs that make camp there and a tunnel has been dug that leads out of the city onto 
a hillside near the mountain. Some of the patrols know about this hidden entrance but no action 
has been taken to close it. The goblins exit the city frequently, always leaving enough of their 
number in the warrens to ensure no one knows they are moving. Goblins are much too erratic to 
sit in one place for long without direction and being outside the confines of Skaar means being 
away from the abuse and work they endure on a constant basis.

Much like the hobgoblins, the goblins of Skaar have also contacted a goblin tribe outside the 
city and trade goods and information with them on a regular basis. These dealings are hidden 
from the orcs within the city, who would immediately become suspicious of such behaviour. The 
goblins do not have any plots brewing and are generally satisfied with their rather poor lot in life. 
Most know they are lucky to have the protection of a large city and do not consider relocating 
to live with the other tribe.

The goblins of Skaar are not organised and there is no chieftain to oversee their affairs as a whole. 
They govern themselves and individuals are held responsible for their own actions. Any goblin 
who is caught doing anything that could anger the orcs is dealt with harshly as none wish to bring 
the inevitable retribution down upon themselves. The goblins are too content with their lifestyle 
to desire change, even if they get thrown on the work crews for the slightest of infractions.

The closest thing to an organisation within the goblins of Skaar is the group of thieving goblins 
that co-ordinate with each other. Other goblins detest this group and are always on the lookout 
for a reason to turn them in to their orcish taskmasters, although to do so is to risk retribution 
from the tight knit group of rogues.

Lake Craddush

This enormous underground lake once fed an entire ecosystem beneath the Hearth Plain but 
since the dwarves claimed Ironhallow several hundred years ago, it has been a tightly controlled 

50

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

water supply. Some of the creatures that lived close to water were slaughtered to near extinction 
whilst others moved on to safer territories. It is not known what became of the troglodyte clan 
that  warred  with  Ironhallow  Hall  –  perhaps  they  were  obliterated  by  the  dwarves  or  maybe 
they too went off in search of darker pastures. They were gone by the time the orcs conquered 
Ironhallow Hall and named this lake after their Warmaster of the time, Craddush.

Many of the more aggressive species stayed, as did those who did not rely on the water supply for 
their very survival. This makes the large cavern that contains the lake an incredibly dangerous 
place, which is why the orcs keep it so heavily guarded. Displacer beast attacks are common near 
the lake and a colony of owlbears continues to visit in order to feed even though their traditional 
food sources were driven out over 100 years ago. 

As if this was not enough for the Lake Guard to control, the dwarves of the resistance, led by 
Darius Stonereaver, harass the orcs in this cavern, where they are most vulnerable. The dwarves 
strike in teams designed to kill a few orcs and sabotage a cavern before retreating into the caves, 
foiling  any  determined  pursuit  or  reaction.  Thral  is  incredibly  frustrated  with  these  attacks 
and the inability of his orcs to track these guerrilla warriors back to their lair. He understands 
that fighting in caves leaves his troops at a disadvantage but he cannot simply leave the lake 
undefended. Although he has a distaste for magic, Thral is considering consulting the oracles 
amongst the Mended Ones for guidance in this situation. It is likely Alodai knows the truth but 
his willingness to share the information with Skaar may depend on Thral’s ability to root out the 
growing number of followers of Kharkus in the city.

One of the most dangerous natural features of the cavern is a blue moss that grows on the shores 
of the lake in large patches. Bluemoss is not harmful unless disturbed, at which time it releases a 
cloud of spores that infects all creatures nearby. The bluemoss is resistant to fire and the orcs have 
yet to discover how to rid themselves of this annoyance, although in day-to-day life it does not 
hinder them much. The Lake Guard would be greatly interested in discovering a way to cultivate 
the bluemoss so they could block certain passages into the city but this is not likely to happen 
given the orcs’ primitive knowledge of such things.

Dungeon Hazard

Bluemoss 
This leafy moss grows on the shores of Lake Craddush in large patches that are difficult to see 
in the dark cavern. The dark blue moss blends with the rocks surrounding the lake, so the only 
warning is the crude signs posted by the Lake Guard to protect their patrols. Bluemoss is also 
used in the creation of lake zombie but only the cult of the Asphibyiex knows of this dire use.

Anyone wandering into a patch of bluemoss will cause a release of spores into the air. All creatures 
within three metres of the bluemoss must make a Persistence Skill Test (–15%) or be compelled 
to walk into the lake, where they drown unless rescued. They will not resist any rescue attempts 
but if left unattended, once again try to walk back into the lake. Furthermore, a Resilience Skill 
Test must be made each day or one point of temporary CON damage will be dealt as their lungs 
fill with fluid, until two consecutive tests are made or magical healing is applied.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

51

78.144.81.132

Aerie

Situated  near  the  peak  of  the  mountain  that  rises  above  the  Hearth  Plain,  this  shallow  cave 
is home to nearly two dozen giant eagles. This group made contact with  the dwarves of  the 
resistance a few years ago and since that time have endeavoured to help them reclaim their lost 
city. In addition to harassing the orcs stationed in the cliffside forts, the eagles also scout the 
surrounding land, keep track of horde movements and direct good-natured strangers away from 
Skaar itself and on to the dwarves. The aerie holds close to four full families of eagles and is not 
practically accessible by any means except flight.

Cliffside Forts

These wooden structures are built high on the cliff face that overlooks the Hearth Plain and from 
these vantage points, orcs can view all approaches to the city for several miles, providing a great 
deal of information and tactical aid to Skaar. At least three orcs man each of the forts at all times, 
rotating shifts every four days and wooden hand and footholds afford an easy climb up the nearly 
65 metre stretch to the forts. The orcs are armed with crossbows and battle axes to ward off 
attackers and each fort has a spyglass affixed to one of the crossbeams. The duty here is so routine 
and boring that orcs often leave their post to pursue other interests during their shift.

The giant eagles have fun harassing the orcs on these stations, diving in to snatch their weapons 
or food and dropping them several hundred feet to the ground below. So far the orcs have not 
managed to kill one of the great creatures, but hate them terribly and often dream of cooking an 
eagle carcasses over an open flame. 

Caves of the Resistance

These caverns are hidden deep in the earth beneath the Hearth Plain and into the mountain 
that now teems with orcs. They lie well beyond Lake Craddush and are therefore outside the 
boundaries of Skaar. This ensures the dwarves are not bothered by orc raiding parties or minions 
bent on the destruction of the last remnant of Ironhallow Hall.

The resistance is quite well placed. They have a runoff stream from the lake that feeds them fresh 
water and several exit caverns to the outside world provide them with a means of replenishing food 
stores and travelling beyond the confines of the city and its environs. The dwarves have used their 
mastery of stone to hide these entrances from all but the most scrutinous eyes. They are so well 
hidden, in fact, that only a dwarf can readily tell them apart from the normal crags and ditches of 
the mountainous terrain. If an orc ever found one of these entrances and lived to tell of its existence, 
it would surely mean the end of the dwarven resistance effort forever. These caves have little or no 
light and the dwarves being content to utilise their natural ability to see in the dark for everyday life 
for this also helps keep any intruders that rely on light from posing a serious threat. The dwarves 
have set up various stonework traps and trick doors to further insure their safety.

The Warriors of the Nine are headquartered in these caverns and use them to launch their forays 
into the city. These raids are a major source of food and supplies for the resistance and always 
manage to slay a few orcs for good measure. Their leader is a dwarf named Darius Stonereaver, 
one of the oldest remaining in the resistance movement. Despite his age, he is still a formidable 
fighter and would never let a major action go forward without personally leading his troops. The 
Warriors of the Nine have a heavily guarded cavern from which they call upon their ancestral 
images to scout their next mission. These warriors are the spiritual leaders of the resistance and 
others naturally look to them for command and direction.

52

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

The Horde Encampment

This area was put aside for members of the horde after several incidences between them and 
the citizen orcs of Skaar. Warmaster Thak decided to keep the two groups separate and issued 
an  order  that  orcs  visiting  Skaar  for  healing  or  repair  not  enter  the  city  proper  unless  given 
authorisation by Hordemaster Kell. Nevertheless, orcs manage to find ways into the city proper, 
whether it be through stealth or a bribe paid to the Hordemaster. Money is the Hordemaster’s 
great weakness and his open policy of accepting bribes for nearly any service or boon has made 
him a wealthy orc. If the situation gets too far out of hand, however, the warlords will make sure 
he does not live to spend it.

A wooden fence surrounds the entire encampment. Two gates break the fence, one to the south 
and another to the east. Guards are posted at these gates constantly and they are under standing 
orders to let none enter or leave without the Hordemaster’s express permission. The area on the 
western end of the Hearth Plain is rocky and has been cleared of any shrubs or small trees that 
may have once grown here. Small holes and caves dot the area, many of which are used by the 
visiting horde orcs for shelter, stealth and privacy.

There is a low, saucer-shaped depression in the encampment that orcs use as a makeshift hospital. 
While few have any skill in healing or basic medicine, the hobgoblin shaman has been teaching 
some of the older orcs to use plants from the area to aid in the recuperation process. The state 
of the encampment is not conducive for healing; so many orcs simply come here to live well 
before they die. Prostitution, drinking and gambling are just some of the vices that wounded orcs 
enjoy here. All of this is run by the Silver Tusks, with a portion of the proceeds going directly to 
Hordemaster Kell.

The other task of the Hordemaster is to oversee repairs on the various siege engines used by the 
orcs when they rampage across the surrounding region. A group of very skilled orcs from the 
Blackmuck tribe live in the encampment and their sole job is the repair and salvage of the horde’s 
engines  of  destruction.  They  sometimes  collaborate  with  the  Ugreckt  on  large  projects  and 
generally admire the hobgoblins for their metalworking skills. Some have accused the Blackmuck 
of favouring the company of hobgoblins to other orcs and in some cases this has proved to be 
true. The Blackmuck have built a solid structure in which they live and many of the orcs of Skaar 
look upon it with jealousy and greed. It is only their reputation for extreme skill in both combat 
and craft that has kept them safe from the predations of their own kind.

There is a fenced area where the wardogs used by the horde are bred and trained, an incredibly 
dangerous place for any except the trainers and most orcs steer clear of it at all times. Wardogs 
are an integral part of the orcs’ horde tactics and there are three full wardog units within Skaar at 
all times. The fearsome orcs that control and direct these dogs are feared by even the toughest of 
orcs and are almost always covered by numerous scars from the bites and mauls they suffer over 
the years from dealing with these dangerous creatures, although the wardog trainer views these as 
marks of pride rather than regrettable mementoes of training gone bad. The wardog training area 
is double fenced, an extra precaution taken by the nervous orcs in the horde encampment.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

53

78.144.81.132

Orcish Wardog
Aggressive breeds such as giant pit bulls and rottweillers are often used as war dogs by orc tribes 
who unleash them upon unsuspecting enemies as a prelude to the orcs’ own attack.

STR
CON
SIZ
DEX
INT
POW
CHA

Dice
4D6
3D6+6
3D6+3
3D6
5
3D6
6

Average
15
17
14
11
5
11
6

1D20
1–2
3–4
5–7
8–10
11–13
14–16
17–20

Hit Location
Right Hind Leg
Left Hind Leg
Hindquarters
Forequarters
Right Front Leg
Left Front Leg
Head

AP/HP
2/7
2/7
2/8
2/8
2/7
2/7
2/7

Combat Actions

2

Typical Armour: Hide (AP 2, no Skill Penalty)

Damage Modifier
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

+0
–
5m
+8

Traits: Night Sight

Skills:  Athletics  85%,  Dodge  45%,  Perception  55%, 
Resilience 45%, Stealth 50%, Survival 45%, Tracking 55%

Weapons
Type
Bite
Claw

Weapon skill
65%
40%

Damage
1D8+2+1D2
1D6+1D2

54

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

movers and shakers

This section is devoted to the Non-Player Characters of Skaar. Most of the named characters 
in the book are detailed here and a variety of templates are given so that Games Masters may 
quickly generate a group of foes with which to challenge his players. The Non-Player Characters 
are all presented in a standard stat block format. Only magical possessions are listed, as individual 
Games Masters should outfit the Non-Player Characters with whatever mundane equipment he 
thinks is necessary for a given encounter.

The  following  Non-Player  Characters  described  in  this  sourcebook  are  fully  detailed  in  this 
chapter:

Cylus Groon
Warmaster Thak
Grogan Thral
Hordemaster Kell
Tallarak Vressun
Akrilla the Witch
Garkyon
Gireous Phlog
Darius Stonereaver

The  demon  lord  Kharkus  is  also  included,  for  use  in  higher-powered  adventures  where 
Adventurers have managed to penetrate the city of Skaar and unwittingly become embroiled in 
the eternal struggle between the two principle deities of the orcs.

In addition, several examples of the various type of common orc are also provided in order to 
allow  a  Games  Master  to  portray  such  encounters  quickly  and  easily,  with  the  minimum  of 
preparation.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

55

78.144.81.132

Cylus Groon

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Value
19
18
19
14
12
14
14

3

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier +1D6
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

12
11m
+12

1D20
1–3
4–6
7–9
10–12
13–15
16–18
19–20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
2/8
2/8
8/9
8/10
2/7
2/7
2/8

Typical Armour: Breastplate; Hard leather trews, vambraces 
and cowl. –4 Armour Penalty

Common Skills
Athletics 110%, Brawn 84%, Common Magic 70%, Culture (Skaar) 92%, Dance 42%, Drive 
58%, Evade 45%, Evaluate 48%, First Aid 48%, Influence 70%, Insight 50%, Lore (Regional) 
80%, Perception 70%, Persistence 85%, Resilience 80%, Riding 120%, Sing 36%, Sleight 40%, 
Stealth 44%, Swim 42%, Unarmed 102%

Advanced Skills
Courtesy 35%, Disguise 35%, Language (Common) 65%, Language (Orc) 95%, Spirit Binding 
50%, Spirit Walking 68%, Streetwise 65%, Survival 82%, Track 70%

Common Magic (70%)
Beast Call, Bestial Enhancement 3, Pierce 2, Protection 2

Traits
Night Sight

Heroic Abilities
Born to the Saddle, Brutal, Defiant Leap

Weapons
Weapon
Cleavehelder (Cylus’ Axe)
Longspear
Target Shield
Orcish Bow

Damage
2D6+3
1D10+3
1D6
2D6

Reach
Long

Size
Large
Large Very Long
Large
Huge

Short
150m

Manoeuvre  AP/HP

Impale
Impale
Impale

8/15
4/10
4/12
4/8

Combat Styles
Battleaxe 110%, Bow 105%, Spear and Shield 96%, Thrown Spear 86%

56

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Warmaster Thak

Value
STR
24
CON
16
SIZ
22
INT
10
POW 8
DEX
11
CHA
10

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

2
+1D10
4
6m
+12

1D20
1–3
4–6
7–9
10–12
13–15
16–18
19–20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
4/8
4/8
8/9
8/10
4/7
4/7
3/8

Typical Armour: Natural Thick Hide; Leather greaves 
and breastplate. –4 Armour Penalty

Common Skills
Athletics  88%,  Brawn  78%,  Common  Magic  35%,  Culture  (Orc)  85%,  Dance  30%,  Drive 
33%,  Evade  48%,  Evaluate  40%,  First  Aid  30%,  Influence  44%,  Insight  36%,  Lore  (Skaar) 
72%, Perception 58%, Persistence 62%, Resilience 74%, Riding 55%, Sing 32%, Sleight 30%, 
Stealth 18%, Swim 31%, Unarmed 72%

Advanced Skills
Language (Orc) 95%, Language (Common) 50%, Lore (Orc) 84%, Lore (Demons) 42%, Lore 
(Dwarves) 32%, Survival 68%, Tracking 40%

Common Magic (35%)
Bestial Enhancement 2, Thunder’s Voice 2

Traits
Night Sight

Heroic Abilities
Battle Fury, Brutal

Weapons
Weapon
Dusk of Dwarves 
(Battleaxe)
Short Spear

Damage
1D6+1/1D8+1 Medium Medium Bleed, Sunder (2H) 4/8

Manoeuvre 

AP/HP

Size

Reach

1D8+1

Medium Long

Impale

4/5

Combat Styles
Axe 90%, Spear 78%, Thrown Spear 62%

58

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Grogan Thral

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Value
21
18
18
14
12
14
15

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

3
+1D6
12
11m
+12

1D20
1–3
4–6
7–9
10–12
13–15
16–18
19–20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
2/8
2/8
4/9
4/10
4/7
4/7
2/8

Typical  Armour:  Chain  shirt;  Hard 
vambraces and cowl. –4 Armour Penalty

leather  trews, 

Common Skills
Athletics 90%, Brawn 78%, Common Magic 60%, Culture (Skaar) 76%, Dance 38%, Drive 
55%, Evade 40%, Evaluate 51%, First Aid 43%, Influence 60%, Insight 44%, Lore (Regional) 
76%, Perception 66%, Persistence 75%, Resilience 76%, Riding 70%, Sing 44%, Sleight 42%, 
Stealth 42%, Swim 38%, Unarmed 88%

Advanced Skills
Language (Common) 68%, Language (Orc) 95%, Streetwise 68%, Survival 78%, Track 66%

Common Magic (60%)
Firearrow 1, Pierce 2, Protection 2

Traits
Night Sight

Heroic Abilities
Mighty Blow

Weapons
Weapon
Heavy 
Cleaver
Longspear
Orcish Bow 2D6

Damage
2D8+3

1D10+3

Range

150m

Size
Large

Large
Huge

Reach
Long

Manoeuvre 

Very Long

Impale
Impale

AP/HP
8/18

4/10
4/8

Combat Styles
Battleaxe 91%, Bow 95%, Thrown Spear 76%

60

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Hordemaster Kell

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Value
17
18
16
14
12
16
14

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

3
+1D6
12
10m
+15

1D20
1–3
4–6
7–9
10–12
13–15
16–18
19–20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
2/8
2/8
2/9
2/10
2/7
2/7
2/8

Typical Armour: Hard leather shirt; Hard leather trews, 
vambraces and cowl. –2 Armour Penalty

Common Skills
Athletics 80%, Brawn 64%, Common Magic 65%, Culture (Skaar) 88%, Dance 51%, Drive 
46%, Evade 55%, Evaluate 54%, First Aid 62%, Influence 66%, Insight 60%, Lore (Regional) 
75%, Perception 68%, Persistence 68%, Resilience 80%, Riding 77%, Sing 46%, Sleight 50%, 
Stealth 62%, Swim 40%, Unarmed 65%

Advanced Skills
Language (Common) 75%, Language (Orc) 95%, Streetwise 70%, Survival 68%

Common Magic (65%)
Firearrow 3, Pierce 2, Protection 1

Traits
Night Sight

Heroic Abilities
Dead Eye

Weapons
Damage
Weapon
1D8+3
Orcish Blade
1D10+3
Longspear
Target Shield
1D6
Orc Crossbow 2D8

Range

120m

Size
Large
Large
Large
Huge

Reach
Medium
Very Long
Short

Combat Styles
1H Sword 70%, Crossbow 85%, Spear and Shield 72%

Manoeuvre  AP/HP

Impale
Impale
Impale

8/12
4/10
4/12
4/10

62

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Tallarak Vressun 

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Value
11
15
10
16
12
14
14

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

3
+0
9
8m
+12

1D20
1–3
4–6
7–9
10–12
13–15
16–18
19–20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
5/5
5/5
2/6
2/7
2/4
2/4
2/5

Typical  Armour:  Heavy  leather  shirt  and  cap; 
Chainmail skirt. –4 Armour Penalty

Common Skills
Athletics  65%,  Brawn  44%,  Common  Magic  45%,  Culture  (Orc)  72%,  Dance  62%,  Drive 
52%, Evade 62%, Evaluate 50%, First Aid 60%, Influence 48%, Insight 42%, Lore (Regional) 
68%, Perception 70%, Persistence 54%, Resilience 80%, Riding 55%, Sing 44%, Sleight 55%, 
Stealth 62%, Swim 60%, Unarmed 42%

Advanced Skills
Culture (Hobgoblin) 85%, Culture (Orc) 55%, Language (Goblin) 95%, Language (Common) 
82%, Language (Orc) 81%, Language (Giant) 68%, Lore (Ancient Orc History) 50%, Survival 
60%, Track 68%

Common Magic (45%)
Bandit’s Cloak 3, Thunder’s Voice 2, Understanding 2

Traits
Night Sight

Heroic Abilities
Linguist, Poison Immunity

Weapons
Weapon
Goblin Blade
Short Spear
Recurve Bow 1D8

Damage
1D4+1
1D8+1

Range

175m

Size
Small
Medium
Huge

Reach
Short
Long

Manoeuvre  AP/HP
Bleed
Impale
Impale

4/6
4/5
4/8

Combat Styles
Dagger 64%, Bow 72%, Spear 64%, Thrown Spear 40%

64

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Akrilla the Witch

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Value
13
15
13
15
16
13
14

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

3
+1D2
16
8m
+10

1D20
1–3
4–6
7–9
10–12
13–15
16–18
19–20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
2/6
2/6
3/7
3/8
3/5
3/5
2/6

Typical Armour: Ringmail shirt, Hard leather trews and 
cap. –4 Armour Penalty

Common Skills
Athletics  55%,  Brawn  38%,  Common  Magic  75%,  Culture  (Orc)  80%,  Dance  64%,  Drive 
36%, Evade 44%, Evaluate 56%, First Aid 50%, Influence 78%, Insight 70%, Lore (Regional) 
62%, Perception 64%, Persistence 62%, Resilience 75%, Riding 45%, Sing 42%, Sleight 38%, 
Stealth 45%, Swim 35%, Unarmed 45%

Advanced Skills
Culture (Orc) 72%, Language (Orc) 95%, Language (Common) 60%, Language (Dwarven) 
44%, Lore (Arcane) 62%, Sorcery: Manipulation 65%, Streetwise 54%, Survival 50%

Common Magic (75%)
Beast Call 2, Countermagic Shield 3, Detect Magic, Fanaticism

Sorcery (Witchcraft) (60%)
Banish, Damage Enhancement, Dominate (Dwarf), Mystic Vision, Wrack

Traits
Night Sight

Weapons
Weapon
Orcish 
Shortblade

Damage
1D6

Size
Medium

Reach
Short

Manoeuvre
Bleed

AP/HP
4/6

Combat Styles
1H Sword 70%

66

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Garkyon

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Value
17
18
17
12
10
13
11

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

3
+1D6
10
8m
+12

1D20
1–3
4–6
7–9
10–12
13–15
16–18
19–20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
2/8
2/8
4/9
4/10
4/7
4/7
2/8

Typical Armour: Leather and chain shirt, vambraces 
and cowl. –4 Armour Penalty

Common Skills
Athletics  70%,  Brawn  72%,  Culture  (Skaar)  78%,  Dance  38%,  Drive  64%,  Evade  38%, 
Evaluate 42%, First Aid 36%, Influence 70%, Insight 42%, Lore (Regional) 65%, Perception 
60%,  Persistence  52%,  Resilience  68%,  Riding  72%,  Sing  44%,  Sleight  38%,  Stealth  52%, 
Swim 45%, Unarmed 66%

Advanced Skills
Language (Common) 44%, Language (Orc) 95%, Streetwise 58%, Survival 77%, Track 65%

Traits
Night Sight

Heroic Abilities
Brutal, Mighty Blow

Damage Range

Weapons
Weapon
Ender (battleaxe) 2D6+3
Longspear
1D10+3
1D6
Target Shield
Orcish Bow
2D6

150m

Size
Large
Large
Large
Huge

Reach
Long
Very Long
Short

Manoeuvre

Impale
Impale
Impale

AP/HP
6/12
4/10
4/12
4/8

Combat Styles
Battleaxe 90%, Bow 75%, Spear and Shield 66%

68

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Gireous Phlog

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Value
17
18
18
13
11
14
13

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

3
+1D6
11
8m
+13

1D20
1–3
4–6
7–9
10–12
13–15
16–18
19–20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
2/8
2/8
2/9
2/10
2/7
2/7
-/8

Typical  Armour:  Leather  chain  shirt,  and  vambraces. 
–2 Armour Penalty

Common Skills
Athletics  72%,  Brawn  66%,  Culture  (Skaar)  68%,  Dance  36%,  Drive  48%,  Evade  40%, 
Evaluate 48%, First Aid 40%, Influence 55%, Insight 38%, Lore (Regional) 60%, Perception 
55%,  Persistence  50%,  Resilience  56%,  Riding  68%,  Sing  40%,  Sleight  42%,  Stealth  45%, 
Swim 35%, Unarmed 58%

Advanced Skills
Language (Orc) 95%, Streetwise 52%, Survival 67%

Combat Styles
Bow 65%, Spear and Shield 56%

Traits
Night Sight

Heroic Abilities
None

Weapons
Weapon
Longspear
Orcish Bow 2D6

Damage
1D10+3

Range

150m

Size
Large
Huge

Reach
Very Long

Manoeuvre  AP/HP
Impale
Impale

4/10
4/8

70

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Darius Stonereaver

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Value
16
19
8
13
14
8
12

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

2
+0
14
6m
+2

1D20
1–3
4–6
7–9
10–12
13–15
16–18
19–20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
5/6
5/6
6/7
6/8
6/5
6/5
6/6

Typical Armour: Breastplate, full helm and 
vambraces; Chainmail skirt. –8 Armour Penalty

Common Skills
Athletics 68%, Brawn 72%, Common Magic 55%, Culture (Dwarves) 70%, Drive 40%, Evade 
42%, Evaluate 58%, First Aid 48%, Influence 60%, Insight 62%, Lore (Skaar Region) 65%, 
Perception 66%, Persistence 85%, Resilience 70%, Riding 32%, Sing 44%, Sleight 30%, Stealth 
25%, Swim 42%, Unarmed 66%

Advanced Skills
Craft (Building) 80%, Craft (Armoursmith) 80%, Engineering 42%, Streetwise 38%

Common Magic (55%)
Bladesharp 2, Bludgeon 2, Heal 2, Protection 2

Heroic Abilities
Warrior of the Nine

Weapons
Weapon
Orcbane
War sword

Damage
1D10+3
1D8

Size
Huge
Medium

Reach
Long
Medium

Manoeuvre 
Stun Location, Sunder 4/10
Bleed, Impale
6/10

AP/HP

Combat Styles
Great Hammer 92%, War sword 80%

Kharkus

Kharkus is lord of a middle layer of a hellish Abyss. His realm is gruesome, a place where even 
the clouds are laced with thin razors that cut and tear at visitors and denizens alike. He was once 
ambitious and sought to replace the god Alodai as lord of pain and suffering. The cruel god 
defeated him in battle, however, and confined him to his prison for millennia. That was over 900 
years ago and his bonds have become weakened in the past few years. He has reached out to the 
orcs that worship him and through demonic thralls and allies has managed to make contact with 
the most powerful of them. As his power and that of his followers grows, he once again dreams 
of usurping Alodai’s power but this time he is liable to recruit tens of thousands of his followers 
to wage war in the material world as well.

72

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Kharkus wades into combat with gleeful abandon, wielding his two whips with savage accuracy 
and power. He is always accompanied by a troupe of servants, and will always summon more 
demons  (see  Monster  of  Legend)  to  aid  him  if  necessary. Very  few  individuals  can  survive  a 
meeting with the demon lord, especially on his home plane.

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Value
33
18
36
28
33
7
22

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

2
+2D6
33
8m
+17

1D20
1–3
4–6
7–9
10–12
13–15
16–18
19–20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
10/9
10/9
10/10
10/11
10/8
10/8
12/9

Typical Armour: Knobby Demonic Flesh. No 
Armour Penalty

Common Skills
Athletics  75%,  Brawn  110%,  Common  Magic  90%,  Culture  (Demonic)  88%,  Drive  64%, 
Evade 22%, Evaluate 58%, Influence 75%, Insight 80%, Lore (Demons) 90%, Perception 70%, 
Persistence 85%, Resilience 70%, Unarmed 88%

Advanced Skills
Craft (Torturer) 60%, Language (All) 75%, Spirit Binding 60%, Spirit Walking 72%, Survival 
60%, Track 70%

Common Magic (90%)
Beast Call, Bestial Enhancement 3

Traits
Fire Breath (6D6, 20m), Immunity to Fire, Night Sight

Weapons
Weapon
Kharkus’ Whips
Bite
Kick
Horns

Damage
1D8+2D6
1D4+1+2D6
1D8+2D6
1D6+ 2D6

Size
Huge
N/A
N/A
N/A

Reach
Very Long
Medium
Long
Long

Manoeuvre 
—
—
Sunder
Impale

AP/HP
5/10
—
—
—

Notes:  Kharkus’  whips  magically  burn  with  a  fiery  acidic  poison  from  within,  allowing  their 
strikes to  ignore  any  armour that  has  not  been blessed  by  a holy  clergy member  opposed  to 
demons in some way.

Combat Styles
Whip 95%, Natural Weapons 80%

74

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Common Skaar Orcs

Aside from numerous orcs of various power levels created using the basic orc found in Monsters of 
Legend, there are hundreds of individual personalities within the city. The following types of orcs 
may be used buy the Games Master to represent any minor Non-Player Characters the players 
come across, without requiring him to spend time generating new orcs to fully populate Skaar.

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Value
4D6(14)
3D6(11)
3D6(11)
3D6(11)
2D6+3(10)
4D6(14)
2D6+2(9)

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

3
+1D4
10
8m
+12

1D20
1–3
4–6
7–9
10–12
13–15
16–18
19–20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
2/6
2/6
2/7
2/8
2/5
2/5
2/6

Typical Armour: Hard leather trews, vambraces 
and cowl. –2 Armour Penalty

Common Skills
Athletics 40%, Brawn 44%, Common Magic 35%, Culture (Skaar) 44%, Dance 35%, Drive 
28%, Evade 33%, Evaluate 40%, First Aid 25%, Influence 28%, Insight 32%, Lore (Regional) 
35%, Perception 40%, Persistence 30%, Resilience 45%, Riding 33%, Sing 22%, Sleight 30%, 
Stealth 32%, Swim 36%, Unarmed 44%

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

75

78.144.81.132

Advanced Skills
Language (Orc) 95%, Streetwise 50%, Survival 45%

Combat Styles
Axe 45%, Bow 40%, Thrown Spear 35%

Common Magic (35%)
Protection 1 or Strength 1

Traits
Night Sight

Weapons
Weapon
Orcish Axe 2D6+3
Spear
1D8+3
Orcish Bow 2D6

Damage

Range

150m

Size
Large
Large
Huge

Reach
Long
Very Long

Manoeuvre AP/HP

Impale
Impale

6/12
4/8
4/8

The Blackmuck Tribe

The Blackmucks are a recent addition to the city, having arrived after a meeting with Warmaster 
Thak and his troops. They realised there was a great opportunity for the tribe to showcase its 
talents by keeping the city’s siege engines in good repair and, in return for this service, they are 
granted the run of the city and have many privileges other orcs do not. They come from superior 
stock to their brethren and their haughty attitudes never allow ordinary orcs of Skaar forget it. 
Although most of the orcs in the city resent the favoured, the Blackmucks’ safety is ensured by 
the vital job they do. They understand the politics and society of Skaar very well and make sure 
to keep on good terms with leaders in every corner of the political map.

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Value
5D6(17)
4D6(14)
4D6(14)
3D6(11)
2D6+3(10)
3D6(11)
2D6+2(9)

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

3
+1D6
10
10m
+11

1D20
1–3
4–6
7–9
10–12
13–15
16–18
19–20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
2/7
2/7
4/8
4/9
4/6
4/6
2/7

Typical  Armour:  Chain  shirt,  hard  leather  trews 
and cowl. –4 Armour Penalty

Common Skills
Athletics 50%, Brawn 54%, Common Magic 35%, Culture (Skaar) 50%, Dance 30%, Drive 
32%, Evade 33%, Evaluate 40%, First Aid 30%, Influence 34%, Insight 32%, Lore (Regional) 
40%, Perception 40%, Persistence 35%, Resilience 55%, Riding 38%, Sing 22%, Sleight 30%, 
Stealth 28%, Swim 36%, Unarmed 52%

76

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Advanced Skills
Language (Orc) 95%, Streetwise 55%, Survival 50%

Combat Styles
Axe 55%, Bow 45%, Spear and Shield 45%, Thrown Spear 40%

Common Magic (35%)
Protection 1 or Strength 2

Traits
Night Sight

Weapons
Weapon
Orcish Axe
Longspear
Target Shield
Orcish Bow

Damage
2D6+3
1D10+3
1D6
2D6

Range

150m

Size
Large
Large
Large
Huge

Reach
Long
Very Long
Short

Manoeuvre 

Impale
Impale
Impale

AP/HP
6/12
4/8
4/12
4/8

New Heroic Ability

Brutal
Prerequisites: CHA 11; Influence 65%
Hero Points: 6
Duration: A number of melee rounds equal to STR plus CON.

You are exceptionally tough and violent. You may add your Strength score as a positive modifier 
for all Influence checks for intimidation or browbeating.

The Silver Tusks
This group of orcs is fanatically loyal to Cylus Groon and are in charge of running his day-
to-day operations. They move about the city, cowing and intimidating all who do not pay the 
proper respect (and gold) to Groon’s cause. Protection, racketeering, gambling, prostitution and 
smuggling are some of their better known business interests. The initiation process for this group 
is brutal, consisting of a series of tests and tasks designed to insure devotion to Cylus Groon 
above all else. This rule has been broken only once, when a particularly useful half-orc candidate 
murdered his human mother to prove loyalty to the organisation. Each member gets a set of 
silver caps to put over his lower tusks upon acceptance and from that day forward he is regarded 
as a full member of the organisation.

There are currently 18 Silver Tusks in Skaar and their number has never risen above four dozen 
for Groon prefers to keep the group small so he can manage their loyalty and operations more 

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

77

78.144.81.132

effectively. Although the Silver Tusks roam in packs, they tend to be very individualistic. Several 
powerful members have been found dead after gaining the loyalty of other Tusks, so most are 
careful about breeding friendships and alliances. Groon prefers his minions loyal to him alone. 

STR
CON
SIZ
INT
POW
DEX
CHA

Value
4D6+2(16)
3D6(11)
3D6(11)
4D6(14)
2D6+3(10)
4D6(14)
3D6(11)

Combat Actions
Damage Modifier
Magic Points
Movement
Strike Rank

3
+1D4
10
8m
+12

1D20
1–3
4–6
7–9
10–12
13–15
16–18
19–20

Hit Location
Right Leg
Left Leg
Abdomen
Chest
Right Arm
Left Arm
Head

AP/HP
2/6
2/6
6/7
6/8
6/5
6/5
4/6

Typical Armour: Scale shirt, hard leather trews 
and helm. –6 Armour Penalty

Common Skills
Athletics 55%, Brawn 50%, Common Magic 40%, Culture (Skaar) 55%, Dance 35%, Drive 
33%, Evade 38%, Evaluate 45%, First Aid 32%, Influence 66%, Insight 35%, Lore (Regional) 
55%, Perception 42%, Persistence 40%, Resilience 55%, Riding 38%, Sing 30%, Sleight 44%, 
Stealth 44%, Swim 36%, Unarmed 50%

Advanced Skills
Language (Orc) 95%, Language (Common) 30%, Streetwise 60%, Survival 50%, Track 35%

Common Magic (40%)
Demoralise 2, Fanaticism 2, Fireblade 3

Traits
Night Sight

Weapons
Weapon
Orcish Blade
Orcish Axe
Spear
Orcish Bow

Damage
1D8+3
2D6+3
1D8+3
2D6

Range
—
—
—
150m

Size
Large
Large
Large
Huge

Manoeuvre  AP/HP

Reach
Medium —
Long
—
Impale
Very Long
—
Impale

8/12
6/12
4/8
4/8

Combat Styles
1H Sword 65%, Axe 50%, Bow 45%, Thrown Spear 40%

Heroic Abilities
Brutal

78

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

skaar in your campaign

Skaar is designed as a complete city to be dropped into any campaign world and Games Masters 
may place it in any mountainous wilderness region at least 100 miles from civilisation. It can be 
used to varying degrees, whether as a mythical city, a base for orcs in the north or perhaps having 
it spring up closer to the players’ home land, causing orc raids and horde activity to increase 
dramatically. Games Masters are encouraged to make Skaar a living, breathing city just as they 
would a human or elven settlement.

While  the  orcs  of  Skaar  do  not  engage  in  trade  as  other  races,  they  will  still  provide  a  very 
important key to any region’s economy. They will cause existing trade routes to be more heavily 
guarded and alter the paths of newly planned routes to trading partners across the land and the 
constant raids and horde movements will create a more war-weary people in the surrounding 
lands. Warriors and rangers take on a much greater role in these lands and the governmental 
structure of existing territories can be slowly affected as powerful warlords who can defend their 
people supplant bureaucracies and other more benign forms of government. 

The orcs use a great deal of fuel and natural resources, and forests for miles around the city are 
apt to be over-hunted and over-logged. In addition, these forests become places of great danger as 
orc hunting and raiding parties infest them in great numbers. For this reason, frontiersmen of the 
region tend to study and hate orcs, making them a natural choice as a favoured enemy. Druidic 
nature types also despise the wasteful and disrespectful orcs and often work with settlements and 
towns to defeat any such threats. Overall, this creates a region where outdoor warrior-types are 
far more common than holy knights and other urban cultish warriors. Wizards often eschew 
such areas, favouring more peaceful and secluded areas not troubled by constant bands of orc 
raiders. Students of sorcery are much more common around Skaar, where natural instinct and 
survival skills become favoured traits over long study and laborious research.

Campaign and Scenario Ideas

Most campaigns centred around the city will probably focus on survival skills and wilderness life 
rather than the opulence of a magistrate’s court and urban intrigue. The orcs live in a violent 
region and their brutality affects all around them. Still, several different options are available 
for Games Masters to choose from when integrating Skaar with their games, a few of which are 
presented here.

1. Survival in the Wilderness
This idea is great for low magic, low powered campaigns where the players have the opportunity 
to make a large impact on their community and environment. The focus here is not on saving 
the world but on surviving to the next day and ensuring those around the characters are able 
do the same. Tracking small groups of orcs and cutting their supply lines when possible will be 
key  strategies.  Guerrilla  tactics  should  be  favoured  over  brute  force  in  this  type  of  campaign 

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

79

78.144.81.132

and it should give players ample opportunity to steer their own futures. There will not be much 
research into hidden artefacts or interaction with the strange leader of the local thieves’ guild as 
finding veteran rangers and druids with knowledge of the orcs and the time before they came will 
be of greater importance, as will finding a way in and out of Skaar without discovery.

The players will most likely come from a small town or fortified area such as a mine or distant 
outpost and likely have never travelled much or been outside the immediate region. The presence 
of Skaar has made an already wild and dangerous frontier even more so, and the people have no 
doubt that one day they will have to face the mighty hordes that spread destruction across the 
land. They live on resigned to this fact, having neither the means nor the will to try to stop this 
inevitable catastrophe. The time is ripe for a new band of heroes to emerge, either to halt the orcs 
from expanding their influence or to put an end to their threat forever.

Example Scenario: The Heroes of Fowler’s Creek
Set  Up:  Fowler’s  Creek  is  a  small  town  built  around  a  nearby  copper  mine  that  has  all  but 
dried up in the past few years. There is still enough copper in the mines to keep the settlement 
from becoming a ghost town but since the nearby dwarven trading post of Ironhallow Hall was 
overrun by orcs there have not been many traders with which to leverage the town’s resources. 
Little more than a frontier town, there are no real organisations within Fowler’s Creek. Even local 
religion centres around just a few shrines the townsfolk visit with little real direction. There is a 
small mill on Fowler’s Creek run by a hard man in his mid 50s named Angus Mcgreeley and the 
water is just deep enough to float logs to a larger river some miles away and then on to the nearest 
city for sale and barter. It is from this environment the Adventurers come.

Characters: Since Fowler’s Creek is so small and isolated, holy folk are virtually unknown in 
the city. Also, there have not been any wizards travelling through the town in nearly 20 years. 
Barbarian types are common but most non-orc tribes and villages have been stamped out long 
ago. Basic martial mentality is what truly gains the most prestige here.

Unless the game is based within Skaar, Adventurers may be of any species except orc and half-
orc, who would not be tolerated by the townsfolk or wilderness folk. Dwarves and elves are an 
interesting choice, as they may be distantly related to one who stood in defence of Ironhallow 
Hall. Humans should be the most prevalent race chosen, as over 90% of the townsfolk are of that 
stock. Half-elves are also likely to be accepted this far out into the frontier.

It is likely that most of the Adventurers will have a mentor of sorts, whether or not he shares 
the  Adventurer’s  profession. The  mentor  of  a  ranger  or  druid  would  be  especially  important 
to the campaign’s development, and would probably belong to some loose organisation in the 
wilderness whose purpose was to fight off the orcs.

Equipment: Nothing above 50 gp value can be procured at the beginning of the campaign and 
the town’s total resources only come to about 1,500 gp.

Adventures  and  Goals:  A  dwarven  emissary  from  a  group  referring  to  themselves  as  the 
Resistance  recently  visited  Fowler’s  Creek. They  believe  the  leaders  of  Skaar  have  discovered 
the nearby copper mines and will soon be sending a large force to take them. The imminent 
destruction of the town and subsequent loss of the mines has finally prompted the townsfolk 
to action and the players have answered the call to arms. The dwarves have informed them that 
there is an isolated orc warlord who currently holds the information on the mines and he has 
not sent this information to any of the other orc leaders for fear of losing out on his rightful 
share.  If  the  Adventurers  can  locate  this  warlord  and  destroy  him  before  he  reveals  what  he 

80

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

knows then the threat to their town will be over. The dwarves do not know which warlord has 
the information, nor do they know his current location. The only clue they have is the name 
of an allied shaman who resides in a cave near the orc city of Skaar. If the heroes can infiltrate 
her lair, they are likely to find the information they need to go after the warlord, including his 
identity and location. 

A group of frontiersmen dedicated to saving the wilderness from the depredations of the orcs can 
be of great help to the heroes. In order to gain their trust, however, the heroes must first prove 
their worth to the organisation by retrieving an ancient scroll that can be used to restore an ailing 
ally to health. They believe the scroll has been stolen by a group of goblins that live in the city of 
Skaar but who venture into the wilderness regularly.

2. The Rules of Trade
This campaign is better suited to a higher magic and more involved setting. The hordes have 
overrun a great deal of the wilderness surrounding the mountains and trade routes between two 
of the land’s largest cities are in danger of being cut. The heroes are probably already celebrated 
for their exploits and have been on several successful adventures. They may be adventuring at 
the behest of a rich and powerful patron, or perhaps they have curried some favour with the city 
leaders. Whatever the case, the people of both cities look to these heroes as defenders and expect 
them to sally forth and destroy the orc menace.

This  campaign  centres  around  heroes  well  on  their  way  to  becoming  regional  legends  and 
their exploits are likely to be told in taverns and inns across the land as they happen. Even if a 
chronicler is not present within the party, one will likely attempt to follow them and track their 
exploits. The heroes will probably have access to a great deal of wealth and resources, being able 
to find whatever equipment they need, given time. The challenge in this case is the sheer number 
of orcs that must be dealt with and the necessity of gaining the alliance of outside forces to help 
defeat the horde.

Example Scenario: The Caves of Dran Hannar
Set Up: Dran Hannar is an abandoned drow stronghold recently discovered by an errant warlord 
from the hordes of Skaar. After he realised what he had stumbled upon, he scrambled to deliver 
the  news  to  the  other  warlords  and  an  expeditionary  force  was  sent  below  ground  to  survey 
the  extent  of  the  tunnels  and  caves.  It  was  found  that  the  caves  extended  for  miles  into  the 
neighbouring lands and were an excellent route to infiltrate deeper than the orcs ever had in 
the past. Using this new route, the horde was able to practically shut down trade along two 
main roads and now threatens a third path by laying siege to the important crossroads city of 
Glencove.

Characters: There are no limitations to the available Adventurers in this type of campaign, as the 
pool of talent the players have to draw upon is cosmopolitan and diverse. The party can even be 
affiliated with large organisations such as a thieves’ guild or city watch and may be driven onward 
by the righteous fervour of a holy man.

Equipment: Again, the players have myriad options here as their available resources are incredibly 
high and it is easy to find items they need. It may take some time to find more exotic items but 
with a little foresight the Adventurers should never be wanting for adventuring gear or magic. 
Once  they  enter  the  caves  of  Dran  Hannar  things  may  get  a  little  tougher  but  replenishing 
supplies under the surface may not be as difficult as it first sounds.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

81

78.144.81.132

Adventures  and  Goals:  The  Adventurers  have  been  tasked  to  find  out  what  route  the  orcs 
are taking to effectively ambush and raid the merchant caravans along Wayfinder’s Road. The 
raiding parties are attacking and disappearing with seemingly supernatural speed. Lord Rencault 
asks the players to accompany his daughter on her trip to the city of Alananta and look for clues 
to the orcs’ success. The players will first encounter an orc raiding party, led by a mysterious 
shaman who flees before the orcs can be destroyed. The players can follow her trail to a series of 
caves, where they will find evidence of large orc movements leading deeper into the earth. It is at 
this point that they enter the caves of Dran Hannar.

Within  the  caves  the  players  must  track  orcs  whilst  avoiding  surface-bound  raiding  parties. 
They  will  meet  interesting  characters  like  Arkanios,  a  deep  gnome  trader  with  some  strange 
obsessions, and Al’ Kzahar, a repentant minotaur monk who lets the Adventurers use his maze 
as a shortcut to the mythical city of Dran Hannar. After exploring the ruined city for some time 
the Adventurers will be contacted by the ghost of an elven warrior. He asks the party’s help in 
fulfilling the final steps of an ancient prophecy, one that will destroy Dran Hannar forever and 
possibly provide the key to bringing down Skaar forever.
 
3. Reclamation of Our Home
In  this  unusual  campaign,  the  players  will  take  on  the  role  of  dwarves  active  in  the  resistance 
movement near Skaar. They will start out as newcomers to the resistance movement, either being 
born of parents who are embroiled in the fight or as one of the Dispossessed looking to avenge 
the loss of their fathers. The campaign centres around the dwarves’ efforts to retake their ancestral 
home and enact vengeance upon those who destroyed the sacred caverns of Ironhallow Hall. 

The  dwarves  have  their  work  cut  out  for  them,  as  their  numbers  are  few  and  their  task 
monumental.  It  is  incumbent  upon  them  to  find  help  where  they  can,  such  as  their  strange 
alliance with the family of giant eagles that live in an eerie high above the city of orcs. They spend 
their time attempting to reconcile the current architecture of the city with that of the original 
Ironhallow and looking for hidden caverns that were protected by the sacrifice and foresight of 
their ancestors. Within these caverns lay weapons and sources of power now fabled in dwarven 
communities across the land and if the Resistance can tap into enough of these artefacts they may 
just convince an army of dwarves to rally to their cause.

Example Scenario: The Legend of White Steel
Set  Up:  A  group  of  resistance  fighters  has  been  assembled  in  the  caverns  outside  Skaar  to 
investigate an old legend, one proclaiming that a vein of white steel ran beneath the Hearth 
Plain and those who discovered it would be destined to lead their kin to victory. The dwarves 
are scrambling to find out if the legend is true and if so are ready to devote all their energy and 
resources to finding the vein before the orcs.

Characters: Players can conceivably be from any background for this campaign, although there 
will probably be a heavy emphasis on warriors, especially those of holy upbringing. Most of the 
Adventurers will be dwarves, fighting for the resistance in their quest to restore Ironhallow Hall 
to its former glory. There is room for other races, save half-orcs, as the dwarves may have help 
from many strange quarters.

82

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Equipment: The dwarves of the resistance have access to most mundane goods and magical 
weapons and armour are relatively easy to find. Most of the other magical items they have focus 
on  survival  or  divination,  as  the  priests  that  aid  the Warriors  of  the  Nine  make  good  use  of 
scrying to aid their holy warriors.

Adventures and Goals: The Adventurers are a group of newer resistance fighters, young and 
eager to help in any way they can. They have heard of the legend of the white steel and latched 
onto it as a new hope for achieving their goals. While the elders among them feel it unwise to 
go on such a reckless search so close to the city, they cannot deny the enthusiasm of the young 
dwarves and their cohorts that sparks hope within the resistance. With hesitant approval from 
the elders, the players go off in search of the legendary vein.

Their first clues are to be found in an old scroll, which leads them to what they believe is a buried 
dwarven temple deep within the mountain. When they arrive, however, they find that they were 
tragically mistaken. Their excavations awaken a great monster within the earth and they must 
stop it from unleashing its fury upon their brethren above. From this they go on to search for a 
reclusive tribe of centaurs, rumoured to have weapons made of the white steel of legend. They 
find the quiet creatures but the only white steel exists in a spear tip now kept as an artefact from 
days past. Still, the players will have confirmed the existence of the white steel.

Returning to their caverns, they once again resume the search for the legendary vein. As they 
fight their way deeper and deeper into the mountain, they start to find clues that lead them to 
believe they are on the right track. First the caverns seem to be full of low levels of electricity, a 
property attributed to large quantities of the metal. They also find shattered bits and pieces of 
very old goods made of white steel. Eventually they come to the hidden mines but find them 
guarded by an ancient and legendary beast. They must face their most dire challenge to give their 
people the greatest treasure of all – hope.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

83

78.144.81.132

Traveller Core Rulebook
£29.99 / $39.95
MGP3800
Author:Gareth Hanrahan

Alien Module 2: Vargr
£24.99 / $34.99
MGP3825
Author: Simon Beal

Judge Dredd
£34.99 / $49.99
MGP10000
Author: Lawrence Whitaker

TRY TRAVELLER FROM MONGOOSE

W W W . M O N G O O S E P U B L I S H I N G . C O M

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Legend & Open Content

Here at Mongoose Publishing, we want what we truly believe to be one of the best fantasy 
RPGs on the market to be easy to use and modify.  We have therefore made this rulebook 

Open Content, in conjunction with the Open Game Licence.  

All the text of this book is designated as Open Content – this means you are free to use 

the Open Game Licence (overleaf) to reproduce this text and build upon it with your own 
scenarios and mechanics. You can even print and sell such work, if that is your desire (and we 

would wish you the very best of luck if you choose to do this!).

By using the Open Content of this book, you also have permission to download the Legend 
Compatible logo from our web site (on the Legend product pages), and use that on any Leg-

end work you publish, to demonstrate your material is part of the wider Legend family.

Please note that the artwork in this book is not Open Content.

All books in the core Legend range (those whose titles have the word ‘Legend’ in them) will 
also be designated as Open Content, allowing you to expand your own games in many differ-

ent directions, while maintaining a solid root that everyone will be familiar with.

For example, you might be using Legend to produce your own gaming world. If you wanted 
to add some high seas action, you can simply and quickly bring over the Open Content rules 
we produce in, say, Pirates of Legend, knowing that everyone who plays Legend will at least 

be familiar with those rules.

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

OPEN GAME LICENSE Version 1.0a 
The following text is the property of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. and is Copyright 2000 Wizards of the Coast, Inc 
(‘Wizards’). All Rights Reserved. 
1. Definitions: (a)’Contributors’ means the copyright and/or trademark owners who have contributed Open Game 
Content; (b)’Derivative Material’ means copyrighted material including derivative works and translations (including 
into other computer languages), potation, modification, correction, addition, extension, upgrade, improvement, com-
pilation, abridgment or other form in which an existing work may be recast, transformed or adapted; (c) ‘Distribute’ 
means to reproduce, license, rent, lease, sell, broadcast, publicly display, transmit or otherwise distribute; (d)’Open 
Game Content’ means the game mechanic and includes the methods, procedures, processes and routines to the extent 
such content does not embody the Product Identity and is an enhancement over the prior art and any additional 
content clearly identified as Open Game Content by the Contributor, and means any work covered by this License, 
including translations and derivative works under copyright law, but specifically excludes Product Identity. (e) ‘Product 
Identity’ means product and product line names, logos and identifying marks including trade dress; artifacts; creatures 
characters; stories, storylines, plots, thematic elements, dialogue, incidents, language, artwork, symbols, designs, depic-
tions, likenesses, formats, poses, concepts, themes and graphic, photographic and other visual or audio representations; 
names and descriptions of characters, spells, enchantments, personalities, teams, personas, likenesses and special abili-
ties; places, locations, environments, creatures, equipment, magical or supernatural abilities or effects, logos, symbols, 
or graphic designs; and any other trademark or registered trademark clearly identified as Product identity by the owner 
of the Product Identity, and which specifically excludes the Open Game Content; (f) ‘Trademark’ means the logos, 
names, mark, sign, motto, designs that are used by a Contributor to identify itself or its products or the associated 
products contributed to the Open Game License by the Contributor (g) ‘Use’, ‘Used’ or ‘Using’ means to use, Distrib-
ute, copy, edit, format, modify, translate and otherwise create Derivative Material of Open Game Content. (h) ‘You’ or 
‘Your’ means the licensee in terms of this agreement. 
2. The License: This License applies to any Open Game Content that contains a notice indicating that the Open Game 
Content may only be Used under and in terms of this License. You must affix such a notice to any Open Game Con-
tent that you Use. No terms may be added to or subtracted from this License except as described by the License itself. 
No other terms or conditions may be applied to any Open Game Content distributed using this License. 
3. Offer and Acceptance: By Using the Open Game Content You indicate Your acceptance of the terms of this License. 
4. Grant and Consideration: In consideration for agreeing to use this License, the Contributors grant You a perpetual, 
worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive license with the exact terms of this License to Use, the Open Game Content. 
5. Representation of Authority to Contribute: If You are contributing original material as Open Game Content, You 
represent that Your Contributions are Your original creation and/or You have sufficient rights to grant the rights con-
veyed by this License. 
6. Notice of License Copyright: You must update the COPYRIGHT NOTICE portion of this License to include the 
exact text of the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any Open Game Content You are copying, modifying or distributing, 
and You must add the title, the copyright date, and the copyright holder’s name to the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any 
original Open Game Content you Distribute. 
7. Use of Product Identity: You agree not to Use any Product Identity, including as an indication as to compatibility, ex-
cept as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of each element of that Product Identity. 
You agree not to indicate compatibility or co-adaptability with any Trademark or Registered Trademark in conjunction 
with a work containing Open Game Content except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with 
the owner of such Trademark or Registered Trademark. The use of any Product Identity in Open Game Content does 
not constitute a challenge to the ownership of that Product Identity. The owner of any Product Identity used in Open 
Game Content shall retain all rights, title and interest in and to that Product Identity. 
8. Identification: If you distribute Open Game Content You must clearly indicate which portions of the work that you 
are distributing are Open Game Content. 
9. Updating the License: Wizards or its designated Agents may publish updated versions of this License. You may use 
any authorised version of this License to copy, modify and distribute any Open Game Content originally distributed 
under any version of this License. 
10. Copy of this License: You MUST include a copy of this License with every copy of the Open Game Content You 
Distribute. 
11. Use of Contributor Credits: You may not market or advertise the Open Game Content using the name of any 
Contributor unless You have written permission from the Contributor to do so. 
12. Inability to Comply: If it is impossible for You to comply with any of the terms of this License with respect to some 
or all of the Open Game Content due to statute, judicial order, or governmental regulation then You may not Use any 
Open Game Material so affected. 
13. Termination: This License will terminate automatically if You fail to comply with all terms herein and fail to cure 
such breach within 30 days of becoming aware of the breach. All sublicenses shall survive the termination of this 
License. 
14. Reformation: If any provision of this License is held to be unenforceable, such provision shall be reformed only to 
the extent necessary to make it enforceable. 
15. COPYRIGHT NOTICE 
Open Game License v 1.0a Copyright 2000, Wizards of the Coast, Inc. 
Legend Core Rulebook, Copyright 2011, Mongoose Publishing Ltd
Cities of Legend - Skarr: City of Orcs, Copyright 2012, Mongoose Publishing Ltd

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

Home to over 25,000 rampaging Orcs, Skarr is a city of pure brutality, a place of 
nightmare that even the bravest Adventurer will fear to tread.  Built from the ruins 
of an ancient dwarven stronghold the Orcs themselves destroyed, the hordes of Skarr 
range for miles in every direction, bringing slaughter and misery to any community 

unfortunate enough to be within range of their predations.

MGP 8310 US$19.99

Alex Greene (order #3583073)

78.144.81.132

legendcities ofskarr: city of orcslegendcities ofskarr: city of orcs