                 LEGEND
                  SPIRIT MAGIC
        Original Authors
        Lawrence Whitaker & Pete Nash

        Developer
        Gareth Hanrahan

        Editor
        Charlotte Law

        Layout & Graphic Design
        Will Chapman

        Interior Illustrations
        Carlos Nunez de Castro Torres, Javier Charro, Nick Egberts & Sendol Studio’s

        Playtesters
        Tressy Arts, Nathan Baron, Sergio Bonomo, Simon Bray, Ken Cabana, Colin Driver, David Ednie, Jessica Ednie, Ernest
        Givens, David Groves, Paolo Guccione, Sally Head, John Hutchinson, Bruce Mason, Carl Pates, Ben Quant, Michael
        Rieft, Nick Robinson, David Shaw, Manuele Verduci, Phill Winters, Ray Davis, Tammie Davis, Nick Davis, Tim
        Truelove, Sandrine Thirache, James Lothian, Graham Ellis, Katrina Hepburn and Andrew McMillan


                                                 Copyright Information
           Legend ©2011 Mongoose Publishing. All rights reserved. Reproduction of non-Open Game Content of
           this work by any means without the written permission of the publisher is expressly forbidden. Legend is
           presented under the Open Game Licence. See page 29 for the text of this licence. All text paragraphs and
         tables containing game mechanics and statistics derivative of Open Game Content and the System Reference
         Document are considered to be Open Game Content. All other signiﬁcant characters, names, places, items,
               art and text herein are copyrighted by Mongoose Publishing. All rights reserved. Printed in USA




Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
                     SPIRIT MAGIC
      Spirit Magic is the practice of animism and ancestor worship. Spirit magicians call upon spirits
      which manifest their powers on behalf of their summoner or binder. These beings have many
      names… dryads, nymphs, diseases, ghosts, nightmares, elementals, ancestors; yet in truth, are all
      sentient fragments of magical energy from which everything is derived. A spirit does not teach
      or use magic, rather they are magic.

      Spirits ﬂow between the mundane plane and the spirit plane, eternally transferring the power of
      magic to the mundane world and back again.

      Spirit magicians interact with these beings, utilising the spirit’s magic to augment or protect
      themselves. Such sentient immaterial beings are powerful allies, being capable of independent
      action and manifesting their powers for unlimited periods of time.


      The Spirit Plane
      The spirit world is a place which exists tangentially to the material world. Nothing physical can
      exist there, only the immaterial. The spirit world is populated by many spirits, which are linked
      to the natural geographical features, animals and plants of the material world. Also present are
      the faint souls of mortal beings whose spirits are still bound to a material body. These appear as
      pale shadows and are hard to perceive.

      The landscape of the spirit plane is abstract, similar to the terrain of its counterpart, but the size,
      colour and vividness of individual features are dependent on the spirits that inhabit it. Thus a
      wild, craggy mountain in the real world may appear as a tremendous spirit on the spirit plane,
      whereas an urbanised region might show as grey lifeless area full of translucent apparitions.

      A soul or spirit which inhabits a physical body or item is deﬁned as being corporeal. A corporeal
      spirit cannot enter the spirit world until drawn forth from its material residence. A soul pulled
      from its physical body up onto the spirit plane, or a spirit which resides there, is considered
      discorporate. Whilst discorporate, souls are separated from the senses and sensations of their
      body.


      How Spirit Magic Works
      Spirit magicians do not use spells to ﬁnd or inﬂuence the spirits from which their power derives.
      Instead they learn two mystical skills, Spirit Walking and Spirit Binding. The ﬁrst enables them to
      perceive spirits and spiritually enter the Spirit Plane. The second allows them to summon, bind and
      dominate spirits in spirit combat.




 2
Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
        Spirit Walking (POW+CON)
        This skill represents the spirit magician’s awareness of the Spirit Plane and its denizens. Anyone
        with this skill can, with a successful roll, detect (but not observe) the presence of spirits within
        a range of their POW in metres. The skill is capable of far more – but such secrets are jealously
        guarded by tribal shamans and only revealed to those who progress higher in a spirit cult’s
        hierarchy. Each further level of knowledge allows the skill to be used in new ways, permitting
        observation, communication and eventually freedom to travel the Spirit Plane.

        Utilising any of the following abilities requires entering a trance-like state, which takes a number of
        minutes equal to the Species Maximum POW minus their Characteristic POW and costs a single
        Magic Point.

        If the Skill Test is successful then the spirit magician can perform the following dependant on
        his rank:

        X    Follower – Can see and identify spirits within range.
        X    Votary/Seer – Can communicate with spirits within range.
        X    Shaman – Can project their own soul onto the Spirit Plane.
        X    High Shaman – Can drag the souls of others onto the Spirit Plane with them, at a cost
             of 1 extra Magic Point per additional person. Unwilling participants resist using their
             Persistence in an opposed roll against the Spirit Walking skill of the High Shaman.

        Shaman and High Shaman may travel the Spirit Plane to observe and locate other spirits. The
        skill provides an abstract understanding of the geography and nature of the region and the
        shaman can travel up to his skill’s value in kilometres away from his body. From the Spirit
        Plane a shaman who succeeds in a Perception test, can also distinguish the spirits of corporeal
        creatures in the material world and thus hunt for particular species or even seek out speciﬁc
        people.

        If the roll is a critical success then entering the trance is achieved in a single minute. If the roll is
        fumbled, the shaman is barred from entering the spirit plane for a full day.


        Spirit Binding (POW+CHA)
        Spirit Binding is used to bind spirits into fetishes and control their actions once bound.
        Additionally, it can be used to summon and coerce a known spirit to perform a single deed for
        a mutually acceptable service. The POW of the largest spirit which can be bound or controlled
        cannot exceed three times the critical range of this skill. Thus a character with a Spirit Binding
        skill of 45% could control spirits of up to 15 POW.

        The binding skill is also used for spirit combat – using mental domination to overcome
        immaterial beings in a battle of willpower. In this case the value of the Spirit Binding skill is
        used to calculate the amount of damage inﬂicted by the spirit magician during spirit combat.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
                                                                                                                    3
      Spirit Damage
       Skill Value                          Magic Point Damage Inﬂicted
       01–20                                1D2
       21–40                                1D4
       41–60                                1D6
       61–80                                1D8
       81–100                               1D10
       101–120                              2D6
       121–140                              2D8
       141–160                              2D10
       161–180                              2D12
       181–200                              3D10

      If the Spirit Binding roll is a critical success, then maximum damage is inﬂicted. If the roll is a
      fumble, then the shaman overstrain’s himself and sustains the rolled damage to his own Magic
      Points!

      The Fetch
      A fetch is a shaman’s guardian spirit, which is usually related in form or nature to the totem spirit
      of his tribe or cult. In order to become a shaman, a spirit magician must ﬁrst locate his fetch
      in a dangerous initiation ritual. Such spirit-quests involve the re-enactment of his cult’s mythic
      foundation to locate his guardian and culminate in a dangerous battle against the traditional
      enemy of his practice.

      The fetch aids the shaman, protecting and guiding him in the spirit world. It is in every way his
      spirit brother.

      The beneﬁts of a fetch are:

      X    The shaman can see spirits, souls and magical auras without needing to enter a trance.
      X    The shaman can transfer the Magic Points of the fetch to replenish his own.
      X    The fetch can discorporate the soul of a mundane living being, who may resist with an
           opposed roll of his Persistence against the spirit’s Discorporation skill.
      X    The fetch can possess the shaman’s body whilst he is discorporate, protecting it.
      X    The fetch can substitute itself instead of the Shaman in spirit combat (if in the same
           location).
      X    The fetch and shaman are in permanent mental contact and are aware of each other's
           senses.
      X    The shaman may invoke any power or ability his fetch knows and likewise the fetch may
           cast any Common Magic the shaman knows.
      X    The bond between shaman and fetch is not vulnerable to magical dismissal.

      The detriments of a fetch are:

      X    The fetch may inﬂuence the personality of the shaman depending on its totem nature (a
           bear spirit fetch may cause the shaman to become soporiﬁc during the winter).
      X    The fetch may draw upon the Magic Points of the shaman in times of dire need.
      X    The fetch will abandon the shaman if he betrays the teachings of his shamanic tradition.



 4
Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
        A fetch starts with 200 skill points to be assigned to its skills. Fetches can grow in experience just
        as the shaman does. If desired, a shaman can transfer any or all of his skill improvement rolls to
        his fetch instead.


        Locating and Gaining Spirits
        Spirits can be found in the spirit world inhabiting objects or locations relevant to their elemental
        source, be it an animal or object. Most are found in remote places where they can dwell without
        the magical disturbances which accompany higher civilisation or the crowding of other, possibly
        hostile, types of spirit. Often the location is a place of striking or beautiful appearance but in the
        case of more transient elements or creatures the locale can shift. River spirits, for example, will
        obviously be found in rivers and streams, but they could be located anywhere along these from
        the source to the mouth.

        Locating a spirit normally requires a shaman to travel on the Spirit Plane to seek out a suitable
        specimen. In some cases a spirit can be stumbled upon by complete accident, in others the
        home of a speciﬁc spirit may be a secret known to the seeker’s shamanic tradition.

        Once located, the magician may attempt to gain control over the spirit, either by negotiation
        or binding.


        Negotiating with a Spirit
        To bargain with a spirit for its aid, the spirit must be willing to negotiate and the supplicant able
        to communicate with it. This requires the supplicant to be of at least Votary rank and successfully
        enter a ritual trance. Conversely the supplicant can be discorporated by a shaman’s fetch, the
        Spirit Walking skill of a high shaman, or the spirit itself, so that bargaining is performed directly
        on the Spirit Plane. Once communication has been established, the supplicant may either request
        the spirit’s aid to perform a single task in return for performing a like service for the spirit; or he
        may offer to form an alliance with the spirit, in which case the supplicant gains its name with
        which it can be summoned in return for seasonal propitiation.




                               Dice       Average         Traits: Life Sense, Magic Sense, Possession
         STR                   —          —
         CON                   —          —               Common Skills: Common Magic, Inﬂuence,
         DEX                   —          —               Insight, Lore (Shamanic Tradition), Lore
                                                          (Spirit World), Perception, and Persistence
         SIZ                   —          —
         INT                   2D6+6      13              Spirit Advanced Skills: Discorporate
         POW                   2D6+6      13              (INT+POW), Spectral Combat (POW+CHA)
         CHA                   2D6+6      13

         Combat Actions                   3
         Magic Points                     13
         Movement                         20m ﬂying
         Spirit Damage                    Refer to Spirit Damage table, using Spectral Combat skill
         Strike Rank                      +13


Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
                                                                                                                  5
      Such bargains can be settled by Games Master ﬁat, or resolved with an Opposed Test of suitable
      skills, such as the supplicant’s Inﬂuence skill versus the spirit’s Persistence. Failure to reach an
      accord has no further effect. Fumbling the roll however, may cause the spirit to react angrily.


      Binding a Spirit
      To capture and bind a spirit instead, the binder must enter the Spirit Plane (using the same
      methods as with negotiating) and engage it directly in spirit combat. If he is able to beat the spirit
      down to zero Magic Points and its POW does not exceed the limit set by his Spirit Binding skill,
      he may then bind it into a physical object; usually an item with ritual and congruent signiﬁcance.
      Such objects, once bound with a spirit, are known as fetishes.

      The recipient of a bound spirit does not necessarily need to have captured it himself. Shamans
      may locate and bind spirits for other tribal members. However, once the spirit is passed over to
      another, the recipient must perform all duties and responsibilities concerning it and it counts
      against the recipient’s maximum number of spirits they can hold at any one time.

      The maximum number of spirits which can be held by a spirit magician depends on cult rank:

      X    Follower: 1.
      X    Votary: ¼ of CHA.
      X    Seer: ½ of CHA.
      X    Shaman: ¾ of CHA.
      X    High Shaman: All CHA.

      If this number is ever exceeded, then the strongest spirit(s) break free, possibly extracting
      revenge if they were hostile to the binding.


      Using Bound Spirits
      Spirits which are held within fetishes are tied to the Material Plane. Whilst within its fetish a
      spirit cannot be harmed by hostile magic, other spirits, or break free of its binding – if imprisoned
      against its nature. However, whilst contained within the fetish, the beneﬁcial magical power of
      the spirit cannot be accessed either.

      To use a spirit, the magician must ﬁrst call it forth from its fetish. This takes a single Combat
      Action. Once freed, the spirit manifests as a ghostly shape forming a whirling intangible aura
      about its owner. It is only directly observable to those who have invoked their Spirit Walking skill,
      or can see magic. Once loosed from its fetish the spirit becomes vulnerable to magical attacks, or
      the attentions of other spirits.

      Commanding a released spirit is a free action but requires the owner make a successful Spirit
      Binding Skill Test to ensure that his instructions are understood and followed. Each attempt
      costs a single Magic Point. If the roll is failed, hostile spirits may act maliciously against the best
      interests of their owner. Fumbling the roll breaks the binding, returning the spirit to the Spirit
      Plane and potentially turning on him if hostile.

      If the spirit’s POW is greater than the limit set by the user’s Spirit Binding skill, any attempt to
      command it fails.

      Spirits may range up to their owner’s POW in metres. Recalling a spirit back to its binding fetish
      is automatic.

 6
Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
        The greatest strength of spirits is that their effects are persistent, lasting as long as it is let out from
        its fetish. This can make spirit magicians formidable foes, yet their spirits are vulnerable to spells
        such as the Banish, Spirit Block, or even blasting them with some form of magical damage. Once
        dismissed or destroyed, the spirit is gone for good until a new replacement can be summoned. Thus
        most practitioners of shamanism tend to keep their spirits carefully hidden away in fetishes until
        the most propitious time to use them.


        Spirit Combat
        Spirit combat can only occur on the Spirit Plane. Since the souls of mortal beings are tied to their ﬂesh,
        they cannot enter the Spirit Plane naturally without aid; and are therefore normally insulated from
        spiritual attack. Likewise spirits which have been bound to a physical fetish are tied to the material world
        and removed from the Spirit Plane.

        However, many spirits such as those of diseases, predatory animals or the malevolent dead, have
        the ability to discorporate the soul of a corporeal creature. This literally drags the mortal’s spirit
        out of its body and fully into the Spirit Plane. Once there, they become vulnerable to spiritual
        combat. In addition, some mortals such as shaman can learn to discorporate themselves and High
        Shamans can even bring others with them into the spirit world. Other methods exist too. Some
        narcotics and rare herbs are said to be able to separate the soul from the body and there are even
        spells that can replicate the effect magically.
Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
                                                                                                                       7
        What is a Fetish?
        A fetish is a ceremonial physical symbol, usually portable, that embodies magical power. Any
        form of item can become a fetish for a spirit but amongst primitive cultures fetishes tend to be
        items made from an item associated with that spirit. Thus, a fetish holding a tiger spirit might
        be a necklace of tiger teeth; or an ancestor fetish might be a bone from the ancestor’s body.

        Fetishes are jealously guarded by their owners and it is usually taboo to touch a shaman’s fetish
        unless speciﬁcally invited to do so by its owner.



      Encountering a spirit on the Spirit Plane does not necessarily mean that combat will inevitably
      occur. Many encounters, even with spirits who have discorporated a mortal, can be peaceful,
      mutually beneﬁcial and informative. However, if the spirit is hostile then battle generally follows.
      Fleeing spirit combat is impossible for souls who do not have the Spirit Walking skill, or some
      form of magic to escape from the spirit world.

      Spirit combat is run in a very similar way to physical combat, save that lacking physical bodies on
      the Spirit Plane, Attributes are calculated using different characteristics. A spirit or discorporated
      soul’s spiritual attributes are calculated the following way:

      Combat Actions are determined from its average of INT and POW, rather than the average of
      DEX and INT.
      Strike Rank is calculated from the average of INT and CHA, instead of the average of DEX
      and INT.
      Magic Points are calculated as normal but are used by spirits and souls as their Hit Points.
      Spirit Damage is based upon the value of a spirit’s Spectral Combat skill or a soul’s Spirit Binding
      skill; see the Spirit Damage Table (page 4). If a discorporated Adventurer lacks Spirit Binding,
      they use half the value of their Persistence on the table instead.

      Spirit combat progresses just like normal combat. Initiative is rolled and the character or spirit
      with the highest adjusted Strike Rank goes ﬁrst, the second highest goes second and so on. Thus a
      Spirit Combat can be run simultaneously with physical combat using the same SR countdown.

      Instead of weapons, most spirits have a Spectral Combat skill which they use in spirit combat. Spirit
      magicians use their Spirit Binding skill instead, whereas those uninitiated in spirit magic must rely on
      half of their raw Persistence skill. Attacks are made by rolling an Opposed Test between the attacker
      and the defender, using their relevant skills.

      If the attacker wins the Opposed Test they inﬂict an amount of damage equal to their Spirit
      Damage to the opponent’s Magic Points. If the defender wins, then no damage is incurred.




              Spirit Domination – Optional Rule
              In many genres the soul of a possessed victim can sometimes ﬁght against the spirit
              dominating him, temporarily regaining control of their own body before the possession
              is re-established. In settings supporting such circumstances Spirit Combat is permitted
              within the material world but only if both spirits are concurrently occupying the same
              body or fetish.

 8
Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
        If the defender runs out of Combat Actions with which to defend themselves, then they are left
        wide open and the attacker may attempt to make an unopposed attack roll. A character engaged in
        spirit combat may forgo their attack in order to cast magic instead.

        Combat continues until one of the combatants is reduced to zero Magic Points. At this point the
        loser may automatically be either Possessed (if mortal), Bound (if a spirit), Exorcised (if currently
        possessing a mortal) or Dissipated (destroyed). If the dissipated spirit was a discorporated mortal,
        then the physical body dies with the destruction of its soul. Some spirits can recover from being
        dissipated if they have the Recurring trait.


        Possession and Exorcism
        A possessed creature is one whose control of their physical body has been usurped by another spirit or
        soul. This is normally the result of losing a Spirit Combat, whereupon the victor entwines itself around
        the defeated soul and rides it back to the loser’s corporeal body in the material world. There are two forms
        of possession, Dominant and Covert.

        Dominant Possession occurs when the possessing entity literally takes complete control of the
        possessed body. The victim is fully aware that its body has been taken over but is absolutely
        helpless, unable to take any action at all. The possessor does not have access to any of the
        memories, skills or magic of the possessed but substitutes its own instead.

        To detect a dominant possession requires a successful, unopposed test of either Perception if
        viewed magically, or Spirit Walking.

        Covert Possession is when the spirit hides in the body of the possessed, riding it like a hitchhiker. The
        victim retains complete control over his body and remains completely unaware of his possession,
        unless the spirit chooses to inform him of its presence. Some spirits take over the victim’s body
        at night when they are sleeping, thus keeping their existence secret – save for inevitable physical
        exhaustion and ﬂeeting nightmares. Another example of covert possession is a curse or disease spirit
        which infects that creature with some form of debilitation. No manner of magic or healing will stop
        the effects until the spirit responsible is somehow cast out.

        Detecting a covert possession requires a successful Opposed Test of the investigator’s Perception
        (if viewed magically) or Spirit Walking skill versus the spirit’s Stealth skill.

        No creature can ever purge itself of a possessing entity. They may only be exorcised by a separate
        individual defeating the possessor in spirit combat, or by successfully casting a speciﬁc type of
        expulsion magic. If the original body of a mortal possessor has been killed in its absence, then its
        soul dies when it is exorcised. Spirits merely return to the spirit plane.

        Needless to say, a possessing spirit or soul can willingly abandon a possession at any time – unless
        they have been maliciously bound to that particular body.


        Spirit Types
        There are many forms and types of spirits. They range in power from minor sprites all the way
        up to the Great Spirits who may be seasonal storm winds, plagues, turbulent rivers, terrifying
        wildﬁres or huge mountains.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
                                                                                                                       9
      X       A spirit can be an incarnation of an abstract magical or natural effect.
      X       A spirit can be a collective soul of a species of plant or animal.
      X       A spirit can be the venerated soul of a dead ancestor.
      X       A spirit can be the vengeful remnant of a dead creature.

      All spirits are sentient, although the degree of sentience and freewill is likely to be dictated by the
      nature of the spirit. Ancestor spirits, for example, will display all the intelligence and coherence
      of their mortal form; but nature spirits are likely to see, view and articulate themselves in ways
      that reﬂect their origin. Shamans are capable of communicating with spirits, interpreting their
      sometimes incoherent ways of communicating, through their training and exposure to the spirit
      world.

      Ancestor Spirits
      Ancestor spirits are the souls of family members who reside on the Spirit Plane after death. A spirit
      magician who quests on the Spirit Plane will only ever encounter ancestors with whom he has a
      relationship, ﬁnding both venerated ancestors and despised enemies. Such spirits continue their
      existence in houses, halls, tribes or communities resembling those they occupied before death.

      Spirit magicians may ask questions or request aid from their honoured ancestors; or conversely
      attempt to bind and imprison an enemy ancestor, preventing it from being called upon by their
      foes.

      Ancestor spirits are a source of knowledge. They possess skills in which they excelled during their
      life, the mastery of which has prompted their continued veneration. The spirits of those who
      died without noteworthy deeds tend to fade and dissipate, once their immediate descendants
      pass on. Thus most ancestor spirits are noted heroes, remembered many generations after their
      death.

      Normally an ancestor spirit may only be summoned to the material world by a spirit magician
      of direct descent. If no blood tie exists, a shaman must travel to the home of that ancestor on the




          Designing Spirits
          Most of the spirits listed here are simply examples of an almost inﬁnite range of possibilities.
          To help Game Masters create new and unique spirits, use the following guidelines:

          X      A spirit usually provides a single advantage. This can be either knowledge, an attribute
                 (not characteristic) boost, a Heroic Ability, domination of a particular species, or
                 inﬂicting a detrimental effect.
          X      Whatever the advantage, it has to be capable of being a permanent effect – being
                 constantly on. The effect must also be balanced according to other comparable spirits,
                 Divine Magic and Sorcery.
          X      The magnitude of the spirit’s advantage is always proportional to its POW. Since many
                 spirits have a variable amount of POW, you can have weak to great versions of most sorts
                 of spirit.
          X      The majority of spirits by default possess a minimum Spectral Combat skill equal to their
                 POWx5% and a Persistence of POWx4%. Those which attack mortals by discoporation
                 have a Discorporate skill of POWx5% and those which covertly possess victims also have
                 a default Stealth skill of POWx4%.


 10
Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
        Spirit Plane. Once summoned or located, the spirit can be asked questions concerning the family
        line, or events which happened during its lifetime. Such requests only require the successful use
        of the Inﬂuence skill and cost nothing further.

        Alternatively, the spirit magician may request the ancestor’s aid in performing an important deed.
        Such appeals come at a cost, usually involving a personal sacriﬁce (a treasured item, a habit, a
        relationship and so on) and votive gifts to that particular spirit. This veneration keeps the memory of
        the ancestor alive, promoting his continued existence. In return the ancestor will possess the body of
        its descendant. This bargain places the supplicant at a dangerous disadvantage since he cannot prevent
        the ancestor from using his body in any way the spirit likes. Unsympathetic ancestors often succumb
        to long forgotten passions, or attempt extreme acts to further their renown – being in little danger of
        personal harm if their host dies.

        However, most venerated ancestors are content to remain in the peace of the afterlife. To prove
        both themselves and the task are worthy of its stature, the magician must defeat his ancestor in
        mock Spirit Combat. If the descendant is defeated, then the ancestor considers the request below
        their dignity and refuses aid. If the ancestor is defeated, it is roused into providing aid and will
        possess their descendant.

        Whilst possessed, the spirit magician may substitute certain of his own skills for the heroic level
        skills of the ancestor. The older and more powerful the ancestor, the higher its skill mastery.
        They normally know 1d3+2 skills at a heroic level of 90%+POW. Warrior ancestors have combat
        skills, shaman ancestors have spirit skills, hunter ancestors have stealth and tracking skills and so
        on. In addition, every ancestor has 1d3 Heroic Abilities.

        Whilst possessing the body of a descendant, the ancestor cannot be called upon by other tribal
        members. For this reason, an ancestor spirit usually only remains until it has achieved the
        objective for which it was summoned. Since ancestors refuse to be bound into fetishes (unless
        forced to by an enemy shaman) they do not count towards the normal limit of spirit bindings.

        INT – As per mortal of the species.
        POW – Usually 1d10+10 and greater.
        CHA – As per mortal of the species.

        Skills (at 90+POW%): Choose from any skill relevant to the ancestor’s profession and culture, plus
        Persistence at POWx4% and Spectral Combat at POWx5%. Ancestors know as many points of
        Common Magic as they have POW. Lacking fetishes, they do not have any bound spirits but can
        summon favoured spirit allies they used during their life (shaman still have their fetch however).

        Bane Spirits
        Bane spirits strive to absorb the essence of other spirits. Due to their entropic touch, the Magic
        Point damage they inﬂict is permanent and spirits dissipated by them are forever destroyed.

        Bane spirits are so abhorred by most shaman that they are often bound and imprisoned in
        remote or accursed locations, preventing them from causing harm. They are rarely used, save by
        the insane, or those driven to suicidal revenge. If constrained to a fetish, bane spirits can be sent
        against other spirits to engage them in spirit combat. If the bane spirit wins, it consumes the
        defeated spirit, destroying it utterly, including other bane spirits.

        Their characteristics are 1d6 for INT and CHA and a POW which ranges from 3d6 upwards.



Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
                                                                                                                  11
      Elemental Spirits
      These spirits originate from the elements, Air, Darkness, Earth, Fire, Moon and Water. They are
      the same beings summoned by such spells as Elemental Summoning but a spirit magician can
      invest their powers within his own body.

      For example, a shaman could bind a ﬁre elemental and use it to give himself a burning touch, an earth
      elemental to move himself through earth and rock, a water elemental to survive underwater and swim
      fast and so on.

      An elemental spirit’s INT, CHA and abilities are equal to an elemental of corresponding size. The
      spirit’s POW is 1D6+6 for the equivalent of a 1 cubic metre elemental. Each further +6 increases
      its size by another cubic metre.

      Guardian Spirits
      These spirits originate from the Spirit Plane and ward the summoner from hostile magic. They
      are often found in places where vast sorceries have been cast, or holy sites where a god invoked
      his immortal power. They can also be drawn to intense concentrations of magic, large ceremonies
      or battleﬁelds for example.

      A guardian spirit protects the holder of its fetish by interposing itself before offensive spells. The spell
      must ﬁrst overcome the Persistence of the guardian spirit. If it fails, the spell is negated. If the spell
      overcomes the spirit, it continues onto the spirit magician, who may then also resist the spell.

      The spirit can neutralise spells of up to one Magnitude for every three points of its POW. If
      the spell’s Magnitude is greater, the spirit is unable to affect it. If a magic spirit encounters an
      anti-spirit spell, such as Spirit Block or Banish, it may attempt to resist the spell, before it is
      affected.

      Guardian spirits characteristics are 2d6 for INT and CHA and have a POW which ranges from
      3d6 upwards

      Nature Spirits
      These are the spirits of natural things which live and grow in the material world. Sometimes
      speciﬁc animals or plants are worshipped as totems – the spiritual guardian and strength of a
      tribe. Spirit magicians who devote themselves to a particular species in this way are always on
      friendly terms with spirits related to their totem but suffer neutral or hostile reactions from other
      nature spirits.

      Nature spirits embody a myriad of different abilities depending on the plant or animal they
      originate from. In general each spirit should encompass one of the following effects, something
      which represents a quality expressed by its species’ corporeal form. If two or more nature spirits
      with the same ability are used at the same time by the same magician, only the stronger spirit will
      take effect.

      X    Boost an attribute – Armour Points, Damage Bonus, Hit Points, Magic Points, Movement
           or Strike Rank.
      X    Dominate species – Can control behaviour of members of its own species (even plants!).
      X    Increase a skill – Gain a bonus to a skill used by that species.
      X    Manifest a Trait – Use a Trait possessed by the species, such as a special sense or
           movement.


 12
Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
        X    Combat Manoeuvre – Grants a speciﬁc combat manoeuvre which can be automatically
             used if they succeed in the relevant attack or parry, in addition to any they may have gained
             for the better level of success.

        The intensity of the effect is equal to either:

        X    The number of steps an Attribute is increased, such as increasing Hit Points by 2 on each
             location would be two steps.
        X    The number of creatures which can be controlled simultaneously.
        X    Each 10% increase to a skill .

        The Characteristic POW of nature spirits is based on the intensity of their effect. A level 1
        intensity spirit has a POW of 1d6+6, an intensity two spirit a POW of 1d6+12, an intensity three
        spirit a POW of 1d6+18 and so on.

        Spirits which embody Combat Manoeuvres or Traits are the exception. Those which grant a
        Combat Manoeuvre have a minimum POW of 1d6+18 (1d6+24 for critical only manoeuvres);
        whereas those which grant Traits have a minimum POW of 1d6+12 and sometimes more if the
        particular effect warrants it.

        The other characteristics of a nature spirit match those of its corporeal cousins. A lion spirit
        would have an INT of 5 and a CHA of 5, for example. If no example characteristics are available
        for the species, they can be randomly generated by rolling 1d4+2.

        Some example nature spirits follow. Remember that these are individual spirits and others of
        their kind may be more or less powerful.

        Rhino Hide (Intensity 3 boost AP, rhino spirit) – INT 3, POW 20, CHA 3. CA 2, SR +3, HP
        20, Spirit Damage +1d10. Persistence 80%, Spectral Horn 100%. Increases the natural Armour
        Points of the magician by 3 points. These do not affect the wearing of additional armour, or
        reduce Strike Rank.

        Strong Claw (Intensity 1 boost Damage Bonus, bear spirit) – INT 5, POW 10, CHA 5. CA 2,
        SR +5, HP 10, Spirit Damage +1d6. Persistence 40%, Spectral Claw 50%. This spirit boosts the
        Damage Modiﬁer of the magician by one step, a shaman whose Damage Modiﬁer was normally
        +1d2 would be increased to +1d4.

        Tawny Might (Intensity 2 boost Hit Points, grifﬁn spirit) – INT 6, POW 16, CHA 7. CA 2, SR
        +7, HP 16, Spirit Damage +1d8. Persistence 64%, Spectral Gore 80%. Adds an extra 2 HP to
        each location of the magician.

        Green Vigour (Intensity 4 boost Magic Points, oak spirit) – INT 1, POW 25, CHA 1. CA 3,
        SR +1, HP 25, Spirit Damage +2d8. Persistence 100%, Spectral Roots and Branches 125%.
        Increases the magician’s Magic Points by 4.

        Long Hoof (Intensity 3 boost Movement, horse spirit) – INT 4, POW 22, CHA 5. CA 3, SR
        +5, HP 22, Spirit Damage +2d6. Persistence 88%, Spectral Hoof 110%. The spirit boosts the
        magician’s Movement by 3 metres.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
                                                                                                             13
      Swift Thought (Intensity 2 boost Strike Rank, mongoose spirit) – INT 4, POW 17, CHA 5. CA
      3, SR +5, HP 22, Spirit Damage +1d10. Persistence 68%, Spectral Bite 85%. Augments the
      Strike Rank of the magician by 2 points.

      Fang Brother (Intensity 1 Dominate Species, wolf spirit) – INT 5, POW 9, CHA 5. CA 2, SR +5,
      HP 9, Spirit Damage +1d6. Persistence 36%, Spectral Bite 45%. Spirit will allow the magician
      to dominate and control a single wolf.

      Tenacious Life (Intensity 2 Increase Skill, ivy spirit) – INT 1, POW 14, CHA 1. CA 2, SR +1,
      HP 14, Spirit Damage +1d8. Persistence 56%, Spectral Hoof 70%. Increases the magician’s
      Resilience skill by 20%.

      Sharp Ears (Intensity 2 Manifest Trait, bat spirit) – INT 3, POW 18, CHA 3. CA 2, SR +3,
      HP 18, Spirit Damage +1d10. Persistence 72%, Spectral Squeal 90%. Magician gains the
      Echolocation Trait.

      Savage Snip (Intensity 3 Combat Manoeuvre, praying mantis spirit) – INT 3, POW 23, CHA 3.
      CA 3, SR +3, HP 23, Spirit Damage +2d6. Persistence 92%, Spectral Foreclaw 112%. Grants the
      automatic free use of the Choose Location combat manoeuvre whenever the magician succeeds
      in his attack.




      Sickness and Curse Spirits
      Sickness and curse spirits are malevolent beings which attack and covertly possess mortals. Once
      in possession they emulate speciﬁc disease effects (see page 78 of the Legend Core Rulebook).

      Sickness spirits tend to gather (on the Spirit Plane) near the bodies of the recently dead, attracted
      by the eventual departure of its soul. From there they usually lay in wait for mortals to approach
      and follow them until they sleep or pass into an unconscious state. At this point they use their
      Discorporation skill to drag the target’s soul onto the Spirit Plane. If they succeed in defeating
      the victim in spirit combat then they covertly possess him and inﬂicting the effect of their
      disease.

      Curse spirits are similar in effect to sickness spirits but they are normally captured by shaman at
      sites of great disaster and misfortune. Once bound they are used as offensive weapons to overtly
      possess the spirit magician’s enemies.

      Both types of spirit have an INT and CHA of 2d6. Their POW can range from 1d6+6 upwards.
      The bigger the POW the stronger they are in spirit combat and the more difﬁcult to exorcise
      once discovered. Each +6 grants an additional disease/poison effect (see Poisons & Diseases, page
      78 of the Legend Core Rulebook).
 14
Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
               SHAMANISM FOR FUN
                  AND PROPHETS
        Legend introduces a new, free-form system of Spirit Magic mixing a blend of academic
        realism and fantasy. The rules provide a toolkit of ideas that can be used to create many
        different kind of animistic traditions but the openness of the system can make it hard to
        know where to start or how to ﬁt spirit magic into your own campaign. This article provides
        answers to questions that have been asked and tools to help bring spirit worship to life in any
        campaign. This is the ﬁrst of two articles: the second will expand upon the range of spirits
        and spirit encounters available to spirit worshippers.

        Animism is the broadest term for a worldview in which the world is infused by spirits, and
        shamanism is just one type of animism. Legend focuses on shamanism but the rules can
        accommodate most forms of animism. For example, Shinto or ‘folk Hinduism’ can be seen
        as animistic practices as can ancestor worship among the Romans and ancient Greeks. And,
        as can be seen in any bookshop, many new age beliefs are fundamentally animistic. Legend
        spirit magic is as applicable to the modern world as it is to the ancient.


        Spirit Cults & Traditions
        Although most spirit worshippers will be a member of a cult, the organisation is unlikely to
        be anywhere near as formal as a divine cult or sorcery school. Spirit cults are more likely to
        be loose afﬁliations or may simply consist of members of single family or clan or tradition of
        veneration of spirits. Such traditions share one simple insight: the world is alive. Each rock,
        plant, animal and each cloud, pool and storm has its own spirit. Such spirits themselves,
        especially the spirits of ancestors, may also be members of a tradition or be friendly towards
        a particular tradition. Other spirits may simply have no interest in the mundane world. Some
        may be actively hostile to members of a particular tradition.

        Because there are so many ways to approach spirit worship, cults tend to be diverse but as a
        rule of thumb each spirit cult tends to have access to ﬁve or six types of spirit with whom it
        is friendly and when added up, these spirits will usually offer 7-12 different beneﬁts. Smaller
        spirit cults have access to fewer friendly spirits.

        Nearly all cults will have access to ancestors and guardian spirits plus a number of nature
        spirits depending on the cult’s background. Cults with particular elemental afﬁliations will
        have access to elemental spirits. Curse and bane spirits are not usually part of a tradition and
        any spirit magician attempting to bind them into service is taking a serious risk.


        Defining Spirits
        The denizens of the spirit plane are varied and diverse. Spirit magic allows practitioners to
        approach spirits in two ways: as beings with which they can communicate and as entities
        which can be bound to service. A spirit magician’s most frequent interaction with spirits
        will be through the use of the Spirit Walking skill to communicate with them. In this respect
        spirits are non player characters who can be interacted with during game sessions. Spirit

Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
                                                                                                           15
      Binding is the skill of persuading or forcing a spirit into service or protecting oneself from
      harmful spirits. Legend provides a basic breakdown of spirit types and how to quantify what
      beneﬁts a bound spirit might provide. The two key elements anyone wishing to bind a spirit
      needs to know about it are its Intensity and its attitude towards the spirit mage.


      Intensity
      Intensity is an attribute of spirits. When it comes to Spirit Magic, the Intensity of a spirit
      measures the beneﬁt it can give to the spirit’s controller as well as how difﬁcult it is to
      command. The greater a spirit’s POW, the greater its Intensity. A spirit’s Intensity can be
      calculated from the following table.

      Spirit Intensity Table
       Intensity POW                POW Range          Typical POW
       1          1D6+6             7-12               10
       2          1D6+12            13-18              16
       3          1D6+18            19-24              22
       +1         +6                +6                 +6

      Attitude
      Each spirit has an attitude towards magicians who approach it. Some will be friendly, others
      neutral and some hostile. Spirits belonging to the magician’s tradition will most likely be
      friendly. Neutral spirits consist of both those belonging to traditions which are not hostile
      to the shaman as well as those not considered part of any tradition. Hostile spirits are those
      belonging to enemy traditions or are inherently antagonistic due to mythic, runic or elemental
      oppositions. The attitude of a spirit towards a spirit magician affects how it will react to being
      approached, to being bound and what it might do if it ever escapes a binding.


      Binding Spirits
      The Legend rules leave it up to the players and Games Master in any campaign to determine
      the precise procedures for gaining spirits with the assumption each campaign will generate
      its own guidelines. There are, however, some common elements that are likely to underlie
      most Spirit Magic traditions.

      Worshippers of a spirit cult gain spirits through undertaking a ritual in collaboration with
      a shaman to bind a spirit into a fetish. The shaman searches the spirit plane for a suitable
      spirit for the supplicant, defeats it in spirit combat and then binds it to a fetish that has been
      prepared by both shaman and supplicant. While the shaman journeys, the supplicant fasts and
      mediates, purifying himself in preparation for the gift of the spirit. The bound spirit counts
      against the owner’s limit, not the shaman’s. Although there is nothing stopping a non-shaman
      undertaking the search and binding a spirit by himself, the task is dangerous and would be
      frowned on by other members of the community.

      Shamans will usually only provide spirits to members of the same tradition or in recompense
      for great favours and they will only bind friendly spirits associated with their cult in this
      manner. The fetish costs the recipient one Improvement Roll per point of Intensity of the
      spirit. This cost represents the time and personal development needed for a spirit worshipper
      to make themselves worthy of the gift. The ritual usually takes a week and at the end of


 16
Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
        the week the player should roll the spirit’s characteristics randomly based on the spirit’s
        Intensity. It is possible the spirit gained may be too powerful for the adventurer to control.

        Spirits with an Intensity of 5 or more are likely to have a POW of over 30 and a spectral
        combat skill of 150% or more meaning that only the greatest of the High Shamans can defeat
        them in spirit combat unless several shamans join together in a Concert. Such actions should
        be played out rather than relegated to Down Time.

        Once bound to the mundane plane in a fetish a spirit can no longer regenerate Magic Points
        nor can it perceive the world around it so the spirit lies quiescent until either temporarily
        released or the fetish is broken.

        An adventurer may ‘upgrade’ the spirit in a fetish to a more powerful spirit of the same type
        by paying the difference in Improvement Rolls. For example an adventurer with a fetish
        containing an Intensity 2 Nature spirit can upgrade it to an Intensity 3 Nature Spirit by paying
        1 Improvement Roll. They can also replace the spirit with the same type of spirit of the same
        Intensity if they wish and they can persuade a shaman.

        Remember shamans are not magic item factories. Each shaman is a combination of priest,
        doctor, teacher, lawyer, undertaker and spiritual border guard for their community. Most of
        their time is taken up with mundane affairs and they have very little time for the extensive
        work required for creating fetishes. Most community members may gain a fetish as an
        adulthood ritual and maybe at one other rite-de passage. Shamans have more important
        things to do than provide magic items for wandering adventurers.


        Using Fetishes
        A bound spirit must be released from its fetish in order to use its ability. To release the
        spirit the magician simply spends a single Combat Action: this does not cost any Magic
        Points and automatically succeeds without any skill test required. Commanding a released
        spirit is more difﬁcult. The spirit magician must use a free action, spend one 1 Magic Point
        and succeed at a Spirit Binding skill test in order to make a successful Spirit Command
        Test. The Magic Point is spent regardless of whether or not the Spirit Binding skill roll is a
        success. A free action is an action that can be performed at the same time as a regular Combat
        Action. Generally, one free action can be performed per Combat Action. Therefore a spirit
        magician can spend 1 Combat Action to release the spirit and, as part of the same action, try
        to Command the spirit. This is how a spirit magician normally attempts to control their spirits
        because a spirit released from a fetish without being commanded can act as it sees ﬁt until
        it is brought under control. If the spirit is a hostile one, such as a curse spirit, it may take the
        chance to immediately attack the owner of the fetish.

        A critical success when trying to Command a spirit means the attempt costs no Magic Points.
        A failed attempt to Command the spirit means that the spirit magician must wait until their
        next Combat Action to try again. While a spirit is under the owner’s control it will perform
        its orders to the best of its abilities but if the owner wishes it to perform a new action, he will
        have to make a new Spirit Command Test. There is always the possibility of losing control
        of a spirit and the more powerful a spirit is, the more dangerous it is likely to be if the owner
        loses control.

        Commanding a spirit currently under its owner’s control to return to its fetish automatically
        succeeds and does not cost any Magic Points; this is an effect of the binding ritual. If however


Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
                                                                                                               17
      the owner does not have control of the spirit he will have to make a successful Spirit Command
      Test to order the spirit back into its fetish. Given the potential risk of uncontrolled spirits it is
      no surprise shamans will only provide their followers with friendly, easy to control spirits.

      A fetish created by a spirit magician can only be used with the Spirit Binding skill. Should
      someone come into possession of a fetish but not have the Spirit Binding skill then they will
      not be able to use the fetish. However he could take the risk of breaking the fetish and hoping
      that the spirit will be grateful. As an optional rule it is possible to release a spirit from a fetish
      by spending 1 Magic Point. This does not naturally give any control over the spirit but fans
      of Sinbad tales may see ways to utilise this rule creatively.

      A fetish holding a spirit will take on some of the spirit’s essence over time. So a bear tooth
      holding a bear spirit may seem dozy in winter or take on bearish odour. Fetishes holding
      curse or sickness spirits may emit a miasma inducing minor symptoms in the holder, making
      such fetishes extremely unpleasant. On the other hand, a stone holding a Salamander Spirit
      will be warm to the touch, which may occasionally be useful.

      Breaking a fetish immediately frees the spirit it contains and allows it to return to the spirit
      plane. A freed spirit may attempt to ﬂee back to the spirit plane or, if hostile, possibly attempt
      to attack the owner who imprisoned it. Malicious shamans sometimes trap places with easily
      broken fetishes containing dangerous spirits.

      The visual effects of using a fetish will vary depending on the setting. In a pseudo-historical
      setting the spirit’s effects would be invisible to the naked eye. In fantasy setting the magician
      might take on certain visual cues or the shadow might change. In an epic fantasy campaign
      perhaps the snarling ﬁgure of a wolf might surround the magician, seeming to lash out at
      enemies.


      Shamans and spirits
      The previous section looked at how to gain and use a fetish provided by a shaman. This
      section examines how a shaman can gain spirits by journeying to the spirit plane and binding
      spirits to service. Using Intensity as a measure of a spirit’s power, the table below shows what
      the shaman’s required minimum skill in spirit binding along with the cost in Improvement
      Rolls to bind a spirit.

      Spirit Hunting
       Intensity         Spirit Binding Skill Minimum Requirements                     IRs
       1                 61%                                                           1
       2                 81%                                                           2
       3                 121%                                                          3
       4                 141%                                                          4

      For friendly spirits, the minimum skill requirement is reduced by 20%. In addition, a shaman
      may pay 1 additional Improvement Roll for friendly or neutral spirits in order to reduce
      the minimum spirit binding skill requirement by another 20%. So, a shaman spending 4
      Improvement Rolls and approaching a friendly spirit of Intensity 3 needs a minimum spirit
      binding skill of 81% rather than the usual 121%. These ﬁgures are based on shamans acquiring
      spirits during Down Time and represent a minimum of risk and maximum guarantee of


 18
Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
        success. It takes 1D6 days of Down Time to ﬁnd and bind a friendly spirit, 2D6 days to ﬁnd
        a neutral spirit and 2D6+6 days of careful planning to safely ﬁnd a hostile spirit that can be
        bound.

        The Spirit Binding Skill requirement to ﬁnd a spirit on the spirit plane and defeat it in spirit
        combat is not the same as the requirement needed to control a spirit already bound into a
        fetish. A spirit magician with a Spirit Binding skill of 40% is able to control a bound spirit of
        up to POW 12. However that same spirit will probably have a spectral combat skill of 60%
        (POWx5%) and would is likely to defeat the magician if he attacked it in spirit combat. It
        takes a higher skill to ﬁnd and bind a spirit than it does to merely control one already bound
        in a fetish.

        Of course players can have their shaman characters undertake quests to ﬁnd spirits during play
        sessions. In this case there is no Improvement Roll cost involved and they can tackle more
        dangerous spirits with help from allies. Such sessions are full of roleplaying opportunities.


        The Shaman’s Fetch
        Not every Shamanic tradition features fetches and those that do vary in the nature of the
        fetch. In some traditions the fetch is the awakened “other half” of the shaman. In this case
        the fetch and shaman are two sides of the same soul with the fetch perceiving the Spirit Plane
        while the shaman exists on the mundane plane. In other traditions the fetch is a spirit (often
        an animal guide) who is drawn to the shaman to become their spiritual partner. In both cases
        the prospective shaman must undertake a successful Vision Quest in order to gain the fetch.
        This is a dangerous ritual, and it may cripple or kill the shaman if he fails to complete it
        successfully.

        The precise abilities of a fetch vary widely between traditions. In cases where the fetch is the
        shaman’s other half the fetch often provides the shaman with the ability to shapechange. If
        the fetch is an animal guide then the shaman may gain the ability to communicate with such
        animals, control them or gain traits of the animal; this is commonly the case with the animal
        nomad shamans in Glorantha.

        A fetch is never bound into a fetish. In some cases a shaman may create an item referred to as
        a fetish, which is used to focus their relationship with their fetch but this is generally a matter
        of tradition and does not usually have a game effect.

        This is potentially a huge advantage and Games Masters will have to decide whether concerts
        exist in their campaign and how easy it is to ﬁnd a teacher for the Concert skill. By default
        it is rare skill and it is recommended you do not introduce it into a game until you feel
        comfortable with spirit magic.


        Spirit Allies
        Over time a shaman gradually makes contact with many spirits. Rather than binding them all
        to service, most Shamans attempt to strike bargains; they provide something the spirit wants
        and the spirit undertakes some service. In game terms, such spirits are effectively contacts and
        act as non player characters. Some spirits are willing to enter into a more formal arrangement
        by providing the Shaman with their name, becoming an ally of the shaman. In response the
        Shaman agrees to undertake some sort of repeating task or to uphold a geas or compulsion.
        On the most abstract level assume the task will cost the shaman one Improvement Roll per
        year to represent the service or inconvenience.


Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
                                                                                                              19
      Summoning a spirit contact or ally requires the shaman to make a Spirit Walking skill test
      and spend 1 Magic Point; this takes a single Combat Action and the Magic Point is spent
      even if the skill test fails. It will usually take 1D6 minutes before the spirit arrives. If the spirit
      is a contact then the shaman must succeed at the Spirit Walking skill test or else the spirit
      does not appear. If it is an ally it will appear regardless of the skill result unless the Shaman
      fumbles. In either case, if the skill test is a critical success the spirit will appear at the end of
      the Combat Round.

      Some allies may be willing to undertake tasks for the magician or even ﬁght for him by
      discorporating an enemy but this should be a relationship that unfolds over time in play.
      Most spirits are no more capable of interacting with the mundane world than mortals are
      capable of interacting with the spirit world. A shaman can however use their Spirit Walking
      skill to summon a consenting spirit to the mundane world. A High Shaman can use their
      Spirit Walking skill to forcibly drag a spirit to the mundane plane if he overcomes the spirit’s
      Persistence.


      Spirit Powers
      There are four ways in which a spirit magician can use a spirit’s powers. The simplest and
      safest way is the augmentation provided by nature and guardian spirits. The spirit gives the
      magician a beneﬁt by impressing itself upon the magician’s soul and is easily returned to a
      fetish. Elemental spirits however require embodiment, a harder and more demanding act. A
      weak magician who incautiously embodies an elemental spirit risks being consumed by it.
      Finally, ancestor spirits possess the magician, taking complete control. Should an ancestor
      not wish to depart there is little the unfortunate magician can do. Finally some spirits such
      as curse and sickness spirits are freed to attack a victim. The danger in this act is that if the
      magician is weak the spirit may turn on him instead.


      Ancestor Spirits
      Unlike the other spirits which are generally bound for their abilities, ancestors are venerated
      by spirit magicians and their aid is requested. If the ancestor agrees to aid it possesses the
      spirit magician’s body. As the spirit magician’s body is the link to the mundane plane no
      fetish is required, instead there must be a blood link between the host and the ancestor. The
      ancestor may agree to inhabit the body of a willing third party provided a blood link exists.

      Some ancestors are prepared to temporarily inhabit an item of great signiﬁcance to the
      ancestor in order to be manifested for some purpose. The item might be an altar, family
      sword, a crown or even a signiﬁcant place such as a tree in a secret grove. The ancestor will
      voluntarily enter the item as if it were a fetish and wait to be released when it will perform
      one agreed upon service. Being bound in this way is extremely unpleasant so the expectation
      is that this will only last a few hours. Any longer and the spirit may extract penance at the ﬁrst
      possibility. Regardless of whether the ancestor is inhabiting a body or object it counts against
      the number of spirits able to be controlled by a spirit magician.
      Although ancestor spirits of Intensity 1 exist they tend to be too weak and too little known
      to be venerated outside of maybe a small family shrine. All venerable ancestors tend to be
      Intensity 2 or greater and were notable heroes in their time. Since they died, the veneration
      they have received is likely to have further enhanced their POW. We will present a simple
      system for designing ancestor spirits of any Intensity.

      All ancestor spirits know the Lore and Culture skills of their people and region at 90% plus
      their POW. They also know Persistence at POWx4%, and Spectral Combat at POWx5%. In

 20
Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
        addition, for each level of Intensity an ancestor spirit can choose one additional skill which
        it knows at 90% plus its POW and pick twice from the following list:

        • another skill at 90% plus POW;
        • Discorporate skill at POW*5%;
        • one Heroic ability;
        • one Common Magic spell at the maximum Magnitude it can memorise (as well as Common
        Magic skill at 90% plus POW if it is not already known);
        • has a fetch. (The ancestor is a shaman. The Fetch’s characteristics are equal to the ancestor’s
        +1D6-1D6. For example an ancestor with a POW of 20 has a fetch with a POW of 20-
        1D6+1D6.)
        • has a spirit ally of one less Intensity than the ancestor which will appear within 1D3 Combat
        Rounds of being summoned by the ancestor through use of the Spirit Walking Skill. These
        allies will not themselves usually bring allies. That said, ancestors of Intensity 6 or greater
        may control a whole army of spirits.

        These abilities will cover most options but, of course, players and Games Masters should
        feel free to be as creative as they want in designing ancestor spirits to ﬁt the needs of their
        campaign. Remember as well that the most common interaction with ancestors is likely to
        be the use of Spirit Walking to talk with them or request aid other than possession. Over the
        period of a campaign, some ancestors may become recurring non player characters, with
        their own agendas.


        Curse, Sickness and Bane spirits
        Although these spirits can be bound for later use they are never used to augment the spirit
        magician, rather they are sent against an enemy. They are hostile to all traditions save those
        perverse enough to revere them. The Intensity of Curse & Sickness spirits measures the
        number and severity of the conditions they can inﬂict on a target once they have possessed
        the victim. Each condition requires one or more points of Intensity, so an Intensity 2 Curse
        spirit can inﬂict two Intensity one conditions or one Intensity two condition. Diseases tend
        to be a package of conditions so you can assess the Intensity of the Disease spirit carrying a
        particular disease by looking at the conditions it causes.

        • Intensity 1: Blindness, Confusion, Contagious, Deafness, Dumbness, Exhaustion, Fever,
        Hallucination, Maiming, Mania, Nausea, Unconsciousness.
        • Intensity 2: Agony, Bleeding, Paralysis, Sapping.
        • Intensity 3: Asphyxiation, Death.

        See Legend (page 79) for a description of the effects of each condition. Unlike ‘normal’
        diseases, conditions caused by spirits do not recover naturally even with application of
        healing skills. Some Higher Magic spells may work for a while if their Magnitude is greater
        than the spirit’s Intensity. Thus a Divine Spell to cure blindness of higher Magnitude than
        the possessing spirit’s Intensity will work but unless the spirit is driven out, the effects will
        gradually return.


        Elemental Spirits
        The differences between the elementals summoned by priests and wizards and the elemental
        spirits bound by Shamans are subtle but signiﬁcant. An elemental is summoned to the mundane
        plane and embodied within the appropriate source. A shaman is capable of embodying an
        elemental spirit, which means that shaman’s body itself becomes the elemental. Elemental


Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
                                                                                                            21
      spirits of high POW are often intelligent and self-willed. As with any spirit, the potency of
      the embodied elemental spirit depends on its Intensity.

      A Spirit Magician can bind an elemental spirit into a fetish in the normal manner but the
      fetish must be chosen carefully for even while bound some of the elemental spirit’s power is
      manifested. A ﬁre elemental must be bound into a fetish capable of withstanding heat while
      an water elemental’s fetish will become damp and clammy.

      When the spirit magician releases an elemental spirit from a fetish it does not need any
      source material but while uncontrolled it will gravitate to the nearest source of its element
      within range of the binding object. By itself it is just a spirit and has no signiﬁcant effect on
      the mundane plane. The spirit’s power does not truly manifest until the spirit magic controls
      and embodies it through use of the Spirit Binding Skill. As with any control attempt, the spirit
      magician must succeed at the skill and spend 1 Magic Point as a Free Action. If the spirit
      magician succeeds, their body itself becomes the elemental. A spirit magician embodying a
      sylph transforms into a vortex of buffeting winds while a one embodying a gnome will sink
      into the ground as if they were some type of earthen whirlpool.

      While embodying an elemental spirit, the spirit magician cannot turn off or dampen the
      effects. Furthermore, returning the elemental spirit to the fetish is far more difﬁcult than for
      other spirits as the magician must make a successful Command Roll in order to successfully
      force the spirit back into the fetish. Finally, while in his elemental form, the spirit magician
      is vulnerable to opposing elements just as an elemental is. For all these reasons, embodying
      a powerful elemental spirit is never lightly undertaken.

      A spirit magician embodying an elemental spirit essentially becomes an elemental of size
      based on the spirit’s Intensity as outlined on the table below.

      Elemental Spirit Size Table
       Spirit Intensity       Elemental Size
       1                      1 cubic metre
       2                      3 cubic metres
       3                      6 cubic metres
       4                      10 cubic metres
       5                      15 cubic metres
       +1                     +6, +7 and so on cubic metres

      The magician’s STR, DEX and Hit Points are replaced by the spirit’s values (which are
      rolled as normal for an elemental of its SIZ when ﬁrst encountered) and he gains all the
      abilities (including its weaknesses) of the elemental. When the elemental spirit is returned
      to the fetish, any damage done to the magician while embodying the spirit is divided evenly
      between all his Hit Locations (rounding up as usual). For example if a human took 23 points
      of damage while in elemental form then he would take 4 points of damage to each of his 7
      locations once he returned to human form.

      Shamans forming concerts to control huge elemental spirits face particular problems.
      Although a concert with 300% in Spirit Binding could theoretically control a bound elemental
      spirit of 90 POW the leader of the concert would have to embody an elemental of some 120
      cubic metres. Remember that all concert members need to be within a few metres of each
      other, which means they risk being incinerated, drowned or otherwise affected due to the

 22
Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
        sheer scale of the elemental. Furthermore, if the concert breaks down as well as the potential
        backlash the shaman embodying the elemental spirit will no longer be able to control it.

        Although embodying an elemental spirit can be extremely impressive it also opens the
        magician up to new problems. Like an elemental, a magician embodying an elemental spirit
        will take double damage from the opposing element and can be neutralised by an opposing
        elemental of the same size or bigger in cubic metres. Reducing the magician to 0 Hit Points
        while embodying the elemental spirit instantly breaks the fetish and frees the spirit, possibly
        also killing the magician in the process. Spells able to dismiss elementals (such as the divine
        spell Dismiss Elemental or the sorcery spell Banish) will free the elemental and destroy the
        fetish if the effect is great enough to affect an elemental of the appropriate size or POW.

        A common optional rule is to allow elementals to mutually annihilate each other. Generally
        Fire and Water cancel each other out while Earth and Air also oppose each other. Different
        settings have different elemental cosmologies. Opposed elementals can annihilate each other
        it by inﬂicting damage equal to their Hit Points directly to each other. Alternately any attacks
        launched by an elemental inﬂict double damage to their opposed element. For example, an
        air elemental with 21 Hit Points is grabbed by an earth elemental with 32 Hit Points. The
        air elemental takes 32 Hit Points damage and is dispersed while the earth elemental suffers
        21 Hit Points damage; it has been severely knocked about by the air elemental but still
        standing.


        Nature Spirits
        These spirits augment the spirit magician’s abilities exactly as described. It is possible to
        augment Combat Actions but that requires a minimum Intensity of 2, giving +1 Combat
        Action per point of Intensity after the ﬁrst (so an Intensity 3 spirit gives +2 Combat Actions).
        Magicians cannot command their spirits to augment others’ abilities: it is the bond between
        magician and spirit that allows the augmentation.

        When designing Nature and Guardian spirits for non player characters there is no need to
        determine all its skills and characteristics in advance as they can always be ﬁgured out on
        the ﬂy. Usually it is enough to write something like: Armour Points +2 (Bear spirit, Intensity
        2, POW 14).

        Finally, nature spirits do not have to be bound to be useful. Higher Intensity spirits will be
        fully sapient and can be negotiated with to undertake tasks, gather information or come to
        the spirit magician’s aid.


        Spirit Combat
        Spirit combat occurs only on the spirit plane and requires both participants to be there. High
        Shamans can discorporate corporeal beings through spending one Magic Point and pitting
        their Spirit Walking skill against the target’s Persistence as a Combat Action. The target has
        to be within range of the skill (the Shaman’s POW in metres). Spirits using the Discorporate
        skill likewise must spend one Magic Point and a Combat Action to discorporate a corporeal
        being whose soul they can perceive and who is within their POW in metres on the spirit
        plane. Naturally they can keep trying for as long as they have Magic Points but if the target
        successfully resists with a critical then it is reasonable to assume the target is immune to
        being discorporated by that particular shaman or spirit for at least a week. As discorporation
        is an extremely powerful ability then one option is to increase the cost for multiple attempts
        against the same person by one Magic Point each time. So the ﬁrst attempt at discorporation

Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
                                                                                                           23
      costs 1 Magic Point, the second costs two, the third costs three and so on. This will prevent
      spirits from simply trying over and over again until they succeed.

      Once both participants are on the spirit plane Spirit Combat may continue until one side has
      been reduced to zero Magic Points. The winner does not have to take advantage of the loser
      and it is important to remember that spirit combat can represent any kind of contest from a
      battle of wits to an artistic performance; it does not always have to be a grim battle to the end.
      The same mechanic is used but how it plays out depends on the beings involved.


      Spirit Combat and bound spirits
      Spirit combat happens on the spirit plane and a fetish (or other binding object) binds a spirit to
      the mundane plane so it follows logically that a spirit bound in a fetish cannot be commanded
      to attack an opponent in the spirit plane. A spirit magician wishing to use a curse, sickness
      or even bane spirit this way must therefore free the spirit by breaking the fetish. Of course,
      breaking the fetish frees the spirit from the magician’s control so there is no obligation for
      the spirit to do what the magician wants. Indeed there is now nothing stopping the spirit from
      turning on the person who freed it. Generally the procedure is that the magician points the
      fetish at the victim and promises the spirit freedom if it attacks the target. Usually it will
      agree because its nature is to attack and possess corporeal beings and also because usually the
      magician who bound it is more powerful than the spirit. If, however, the owner is weaker than
      the spirit the spirit is completely free to attack its owner instead. This is yet another reason
      shamans are reluctant to provide these types of spirits to worshippers in their tradition.

      In game terms, assume that a spirit with a lower POW than the magician will attack the
      intended target. Optionally, call for a Spirit Binding roll opposed by the spirit’s Spectral
      Combat Skill. If the magician fails to win, the spirit simply departs. If the magician fumbles,
      or if he fails while the spirit succeeds and the spirit is of greater POW than the magician, it
      will turn on him instead.

      Generally a spirit magician does not bind an aggressive spirit like a curse spirit to a fetish as
      the risks are high and the fetish is unpleasant to handle. Instead, if the magician wishes to
      send such a spirit against an enemy the usual procedure is to journey to the spirit plane and
      defeat the appropriate spirit; once defeated the shaman can compel the spirit to one service.
      A possession or part of the target is burnt or otherwise consumed in order to identify the
      target. Once the spirit has regained its Magic Points it will journey to the target and attack
      it. Alternately the shaman may command the defeated spirit to perform one service in the
      future. Such a spirit will act like a spirit contact and come within 1D6 minutes of a successful
      Spirit Walking skill test to attack an opponent.

      The most fearsome shamans are those from traditions with friendly curse and sickness spirits.
      Such spirits may become allies and willingly attack victims nominated by the shaman. Once
      the victim is dead, the ally will return to the shaman to beg for more victims.

      If spirit combat happens on the spirit plane, what does it look like back on the mundane
      plane? The answer to that depends on the victim’s Spirit Walking skill. Someone with no
      ability in the skill has no way of controlling their physical body while they are on the spirit
      plane so when they are attacked they might writhe around and show symptoms of the attack.
      Someone being attacked by a sickness spirit might break out in boils and cold sweats or
      might vomit endlessly depending on the conditions they are ﬁghting against. Someone who
      has training in Spirit Walking may be able to mostly control their body showing just small
      signs of stress. A shaman with a Fetch will be able to sit serenely, their body undisturbed
      while on the spirit plane the struggle ensues.
 24
Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
        In campaigns with a lot of spirit combat various questions come up about how exactly ﬁghts
        occur and whether it is possible for one side to ﬂee. Generally speaking, if a spirit magician
        is looking for a spirit to bind he must hunt the spirit, sneaking close enough to it to be
        able to attack it. Spirit walking corporeal beings as well as natural spirits can attack anyone
        within their POW in metres. While adjacent the combat looks like two enemies exchanging
        blows while enemies distant from each other appear to aim missiles or simply leap at each
        other. Like normal combat, spirit combat can generate Combat Manoeuvres although many
        will be effectively meaningless. The Change Range manoeuvre (or action) can be used to
        disengage and ﬂee. If the ﬂeeing spirit has a higher POW than the other spirit then once it
        has successfully performed a Range Change it can ﬂee automatically. If the other spirit has a
        higher POW then it will be able to hunt down the ﬂeeing spirit, though that might take some
        time. As a rule of thumb spirits and spirit walking mortals travel at a speed equal to their
        POW on the spirit plane. Unfortunates on the spirit plane without any kind of spirit walking
        skill are virtually trapped as they can move but can not follow a direction so they tend to drift
        aimlessly. Such characters trying to defend themselves in spirit combat through using half
        their Persistence skill are also unable to gain Combat Manoeuvres.

        Characters who have Dedicated a large amount of their POW can be very vulnerable to spirit
        combat. One option is to rule the cost to discorporate a character with Dedicated POW is
        one Magic Point plus one Magic Point for each point of Dedicated POW of the target. A
        spirit wishing to discorporate a character who has 4 points of Dedicated POW would have
        to spend 5 Magic Points to make the attempt. This represents the difﬁculty of transferring
        the Dedicated element of a person’s soul to the spirit plane. Discorporating a character with
        a large amount of Dedicated POW may also draw the attention of spiritual guardians tasked
        to protect the faithful.

        One of the primary tasks for shamans is to exorcise spirits possessing the faithful. The most
        common technique is to use Spirit Walking to ﬁnd the spirit within its body. At this point a
        High Shaman can use their Spirit Walking skill to forcibly discorporate the spirit and then
        either he or his fetch can battle it on the spirit plane. More junior shamans will have to rely on
        their fetch to discorporate the spirit. In both cases it is usually the fetch that battles the spirit,
        leaving the shaman free to perform physical actions acting as a complementary skill for the
        fetch’s combat skill. Usually this will be the use of the Healing skill but it may also include
        drumming, singing, dancing, burning of herbs to make the spirit drowsy and so on. That said,
        once the spirit has been discorporated it may attempt to ﬂee if the shaman or his fetch clearly
        overmatches it so it is often up to the shaman as to whether he wishes to pursue it.


        Spirits & Society
        In societies where Spirit Magic is the main form of spirituality, spirits and fetishes are ever-
        present and a shaman fulﬁls the same role as a priest. It can be easy to forget that spirits are
        not just “power ups” or resources to be used. The spirits are not tools, however, they are part
        of the society. Most people will have a shrine to revered ancestors, a fetish holding a totem
        spirit and will take part in ceremonies of remembrance and revitalisation. In general, animists
        regard spirits in one of three ways.

        • they revere their honoured ancestors and totem spirits;
        • they respect the power of the spirits of the world around them;
        • and they fear the malevolent spirits of their enemies.

        Player characters who walk the spirit plane, binding spirits against their will and generally
        treating them as weapons and armour will soon gain a poor reputation both in the mundane
        world and on the spirit plane.

Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
                                                                                                                 25
      Most members of the society will know enough Spirit Walking to see the spirits around them
      when they meditate and enough Spirit Binding to use their fetishes properly provided they
      take time. It is highly unlikely they will ever engage in a life and death battle on the spirit
      plane (that is what the shaman is for) so for them the Binding skill represents the proper
      means of address, the proper visualisation and proper state of mind needed to invoke the
      power of the spirit within the Fetish.

      The shaman is the bridge between the mortal world and the spirit world. He lives a life in two
      worlds and with the shaman’s help, the members of the tribe can pass through to the spirit
      world to converse with those who have gone before. Naturally a powerful shaman tends to
      attract attention on the spirit plane. When viewed on the spirit plane, the shaman’s soul echo is
      often at the centre of many spirits eager for attention. This can be highly distracting and may
      attract the attention of predators but a powerful shaman should have built a strong enough
      web of allies that most predators would rather hunt less powerful prey. Player character
      shamans, however, should expect occasional very unpleasant surprises...


      Trapped Spirits
      Some spirits occasionally get accidentally bound to the mundane plane and become Haunts.
      The spirits of the dead who did not receive the proper funeral rites or who have died violently
      may be incapable of leaving the mundane plane. Other mortals may have been cursed or may
      have died before an important vow was completed or died full of hatred and rage and become
      bound to the mundane world. Such spirits may be bound to the bones of their corpse, a tree
      from which they were hung or maybe a cliff from which they jumped to commit suicide. By
      deﬁnition Haunts are trapped on the mundane plane and cannot discorporate victims in an
      attempt to possess them. In fact most such spirits can do little but bewail their fate. Some,
      though, may have acquired certain powers. The list should be limited only by your creativity
      but some include.

      • Telekinesis: the spirit has a STR equal to its Intensity, which it can use to move items
      around.
      • Miasma: the spirit can induce feelings of dread and despair, maybe even fear and terror. The
      Magnitude of the effect depends on the spirit’s Intensity. An Intensity 4 Haunt may be able to
      induce a level of Fear that is potentially lethal.
      • Wraith form: the spirit is able to physically damage corporeal beings. The spirit can
      physically attack with a skill equal to its POW*3% doing Hit Point damage equal to its usual
      Spirit Damage ignoring all physical armour. For example a spirit with a POW of 18 usually
      has a spectral combat skill of 90% meaning that it normally does 1D10 damage to Magic
      Points. When attacking physically it attacks at a skill of 54% and does 1D10 damage to Hit
      Points in a location ignoring all physical armour. Magical armour such as Protection still
      works however. • Cast magic. Becoming a Haunt usually severs the spirit from any form of
      higher magic but some may retain the ability to cast Common Magic. An awful lot of Haunts
      consist of spirits casting magic such as Befuddle, Disruption, Demoralise, Fanaticism and
      so on.

      Like bound spirits, Haunts cannot regenerate Magic Points normally but they are able to
      tap Magic Points from the natural world around them, a process that inevitably creates an
      unsettling area shunned by animals and where the plants are stunted and withered. A Haunt
      can tap the POW of any animal or plant with lower POW than the Haunt’s Intensity to
      provide it with Magic Points up to the limit of its normal POW. Generally most Haunts
      must manifest in order to use any of their abilities. While a Haunt is manifested it becomes
      vulnerable to magical damage, however destroying it with damage simply drives it back to its
      binding until it has regained Magic Points through tapping its surroundings.
 26
Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
        Dealing with a Haunt is not easy. Spirit Walking or magical senses may reveal the location of
        the binding object. Sometimes destroying the binding object is enough to release the Haunt
        but usually any attempt to release the Haunt requires determining why the spirit became
        bound in the ﬁrst place and undoing the effects.


        Fighting Wraiths
        A manifested Wraith Spirit has only one hit location and it has a number of Hit Points equal
        to its POW. Reducing its Hit Points to zero will temporarily drive the Wraith back to its
        binding for 24 hours, after which its Hit Points will be fully regenerated. The weapon the
        spirit uses depends on its Intensity. Each point of Intensity counts as one rank of Size and
        Reach so an Intensity 3 spirit could use a spectral weapon with a Size of Large and Reach
        of Medium. As the spirit is intangible parrying the attack has no effect normally but if a
        weapon is affected by some form of weapon enhancing magic then it can usually block 1
        size equivalent for each point of Magnitude. As with any kind of combat both participants
        can generate Combat Manoeuvres where they are appropriate; being impaled by a spectral
        dagger is every bit as nasty as being impaled by a real one.




Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
                                                                                                        27
                                 Legend & Open Content
        Here at Mongoose Publishing, we want what we truly believe to be one of the best fantasy
       RPGs on the market to be easy to use and modify. We have therefore made this PDF Open
                       Content, in conjunction with the Open Game Licence.

          All the text of this PDF is designated as Open Content – this means you are free to use
        the Open Game Licence (overleaf ) to reproduce this text and build upon it with your own
       scenarios and mechanics. You can even print and sell such work, if that is your desire (and we
                       would wish you the very best of luck if you choose to do this!).

       By using the Open Content of this PDF, you also have permission to download the Legend
      Compatible logo from our web site (on the Legend product pages), and use that on any Legend
           work you publish, to demonstrate your material is part of the wider Legend family.

                      Please note that the artwork in this PDF is not Open Content.

         All books in the core Legend range (those whose titles have the word ‘Legend’ in them)
        will also be designated as Open Content, allowing you to expand your own games in many
          different directions, while maintaining a solid root that everyone will be familiar with.

       For example, you might be using Legend to produce your own gaming world. If you wanted
      to add some high seas action, you can simply and quickly bring over the Open Content rules
      we produce in, say, Pirates of Legend, knowing that everyone who plays Legend will at least be
                                         familiar with those rules.




 28
Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
OPEN GAME LICENSE Version 1.0a
The following text is the property of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. and is Copyright 2000 Wizards of the Coast, Inc (‘Wizards’).
All Rights Reserved.
1. Deﬁnitions: (a)’Contributors’ means the copyright and/or trademark owners who have contributed Open Game
Content; (b)’Derivative Material’ means copyrighted material including derivative works and translations (including into
other computer languages), potation, modiﬁcation, correction, addition, extension, upgrade, improvement, compilation,
abridgment or other form in which an existing work may be recast, transformed or adapted; (c) ‘Distribute’ means to
reproduce, license, rent, lease, sell, broadcast, publicly display, transmit or otherwise distribute; (d)’Open Game Content’
means the game mechanic and includes the methods, procedures, processes and routines to the extent such content does not
embody the Product Identity and is an enhancement over the prior art and any additional content clearly identiﬁed as Open
Game Content by the Contributor, and means any work covered by this License, including translations and derivative works
under copyright law, but speciﬁcally excludes Product Identity. (e) ‘Product Identity’ means product and product line names,
logos and identifying marks including trade dress; artifacts; creatures characters; stories, storylines, plots, thematic elements,
dialogue, incidents, language, artwork, symbols, designs, depictions, likenesses, formats, poses, concepts, themes and
graphic, photographic and other visual or audio representations; names and descriptions of characters, spells, enchantments,
personalities, teams, personas, likenesses and special abilities; places, locations, environments, creatures, equipment, magical
or supernatural abilities or effects, logos, symbols, or graphic designs; and any other trademark or registered trademark clearly
identiﬁed as Product identity by the owner of the Product Identity, and which speciﬁcally excludes the Open Game Content;
(f ) ‘Trademark’ means the logos, names, mark, sign, motto, designs that are used by a Contributor to identify itself or its
products or the associated products contributed to the Open Game License by the Contributor (g) ‘Use’, ‘Used’ or ‘Using’
means to use, Distribute, copy, edit, format, modify, translate and otherwise create Derivative Material of Open Game
Content. (h) ‘You’ or ‘Your’ means the licensee in terms of this agreement.
2. The License: This License applies to any Open Game Content that contains a notice indicating that the Open Game
Content may only be Used under and in terms of this License. You must afﬁx such a notice to any Open Game Content that
you Use. No terms may be added to or subtracted from this License except as described by the License itself. No other terms
or conditions may be applied to any Open Game Content distributed using this License.
3. Offer and Acceptance: By Using the Open Game Content You indicate Your acceptance of the terms of this License.
4. Grant and Consideration: In consideration for agreeing to use this License, the Contributors grant You a perpetual,
worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive license with the exact terms of this License to Use, the Open Game Content.
5. Representation of Authority to Contribute: If You are contributing original material as Open Game Content, You
represent that Your Contributions are Your original creation and/or You have sufﬁcient rights to grant the rights conveyed
by this License.
6. Notice of License Copyright: You must update the COPYRIGHT NOTICE portion of this License to include the exact
text of the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any Open Game Content You are copying, modifying or distributing, and You must
add the title, the copyright date, and the copyright holder’s name to the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any original Open
Game Content you Distribute.
7. Use of Product Identity: You agree not to Use any Product Identity, including as an indication as to compatibility, except
as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of each element of that Product Identity. You agree
not to indicate compatibility or co-adaptability with any Trademark or Registered Trademark in conjunction with a work
containing Open Game Content except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of such
Trademark or Registered Trademark. The use of any Product Identity in Open Game Content does not constitute a challenge
to the ownership of that Product Identity. The owner of any Product Identity used in Open Game Content shall retain all
rights, title and interest in and to that Product Identity.
8. Identiﬁcation: If you distribute Open Game Content You must clearly indicate which portions of the work that you are
distributing are Open Game Content.
9. Updating the License: Wizards or its designated Agents may publish updated versions of this License. You may use any
authorised version of this License to copy, modify and distribute any Open Game Content originally distributed under any
version of this License.
10. Copy of this License: You MUST include a copy of this License with every copy of the Open Game Content You
Distribute.
11. Use of Contributor Credits: You may not market or advertise the Open Game Content using the name of any Contributor
unless You have written permission from the Contributor to do so.
12. Inability to Comply: If it is impossible for You to comply with any of the terms of this License with respect to some or
all of the Open Game Content due to statute, judicial order, or governmental regulation then You may not Use any Open
Game Material so affected.
13. Termination: This License will terminate automatically if You fail to comply with all terms herein and fail to cure such
breach within 30 days of becoming aware of the breach. All sublicenses shall survive the termination of this License.
14. Reformation: If any provision of this License is held to be unenforceable, such provision shall be reformed only to the
extent necessary to make it enforceable.
       15. COPYRIGHT NOTICE
       Open Game License v 1.0a Copyright 2000, Wizards of the Coast, Inc.
       Legend Core Rulebook, Copyright 2011, Mongoose Publishing Ltd
       Spirit Magic, Copyright 2011, Mongoose Publishing Ltd
  Jeremy Bauerle (order #5555197)
                                                                                                                                     29
